# Chapter 1: Introduction


<!-- Page 8 -->
Chapter 1
Introduction
Jean-Benoit Morin and Pierre Samozino
Everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.
Albert Einstein (1879–1955)
Although it is a “young” scientiﬁc discipline, locomotion and sport biome-
chanics has taken an important place in the daily routine of many practitioners of
sports training, medicine and rehabilitation. It allows both a better understanding of
human locomotion and performance and a better design of sports training and injury
prevention programs. In these processes, the testing of athletes is crucial, and the
quality and quantity of variables analysed will directly inﬂuence the effectiveness of
coaches, physiotherapists and other practitioners’ interventions.
This book presents a state of the art of innovative methods, and for most of them,
gives direct and practical insights into how practitioners may beneﬁt from using
them in their everyday practice. It also details how to interpret the data measured,
and the underlying neuromuscular and biomechanical factors related to sport
performances.
Written and edited by the same researchers who proposed and validated these
methods and concepts, the aim of this book is to both present innovative methods
and concepts for an effective and accurate training and testing process (most of
them being based on very simple technology and data processing methods), and
discuss the associated underlying knowledge. Before presenting in details the
theoretical basis and practical applications of these methods and concepts in the
J.-B. Morin (&)
Laboratory of Human Motricity, Education Sport and Health,
Université Côte D’Azur, 261 Route de Grenoble, 06205 Nice, France
e-mail: jean-benoit.morin@unice.fr
P. Samozino (&)
Laboratoire Inter-universitaire de Biologie de la Motricité, Université de Savoie Mont Blanc,
Campus Scientiﬁque, 73000 Le Bourget du Lac, Chambéry, France
e-mail: pierre.samozino@univ-smb.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_1
1


<!-- Page 9 -->
following chapters, this introduction section will focus on the speciﬁcities of
the overall approach the authors of this book used as sport scientists to bring some
new insights in human performances.
1.1
Optimizing Sport Performance Is like Cooking
A good dish is the result of the optimal combination of different ingredients. A head
cooking chief chooses the best ingredients and mixes them in the optimal way.
Similar processes happen in sports. Performance is a complex integration of dif-
ferent qualities, abilities and skills. The head cooking chief is the coach, or the
strength and conditioning coach if we focus on physical qualities. He has the genius
of training to mix at best the different ingredients required to reach high levels of
performance. To improve athlete’s performance, one needs to know the different
ingredients well, and how they can interact, to achieve the best mix possible. Both
of the latter can come from empirical experience, but also, from evidence and data
brought by sport sciences. Sport scientists do not aim to propose take-away recipes
to sport practitioners, but only to bring some insights about ingredients, effects of
their combinations and how to accurately taste/test them. This book presents some
of these “ingredients” related to running, jumping, throwing and cycling perfor-
mance, notably innovative methods and concepts to test and quantify some of these
ingredients for each athlete, most of these methods being easily usable out of
laboratories.
In the same way that only one ingredient cannot be not responsible of the
success of a delicious dish, the performance in sport does not depend on only one or
two factors. However, to better understand the effect of one speciﬁc physical,
technical, psychological or tactical quality on the ﬁnal performance, the sport sci-
entist is forced to isolate each of them and to study their effect on only one part of
the performance. This does not mean that he neglects the other factors also con-
tributing to performance, but increasing the knowledge about a speciﬁc factor
necessary goes by playing with this factor and considering the others as stable
(ceteris paribus). For instance, explosive movements and sprint accelerations are
key factors in soccer. While a good sprinter would not be necessarily a good soccer
player since many other speciﬁc qualities and skills are needed, a soccer player who
jumps higher, accelerates more and runs faster than his opponent, all other qualities
being equal, will take a certain advantage in the game. So, increasing the under-
standing and evaluation of individual capabilities determining explosive perfor-
mances is of great interest, yet not sufﬁcient, to optimize soccer performance. In a
delicious dish, each ingredient is indispensable, even not enough to explain the ﬁnal
ﬂavor. This book will present theoretical and practical insights about biomechanical
factors determining the ability to run or pedal faster, to jump higher or to throw
further, which can be interesting to improve performance in some sports, keeping in
mind that they are only some ingredients of the success. Sport practitioners should
be aware about these factors and how to evaluate and train them, but they have to
2
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino


<!-- Page 10 -->
integrate and associate them at best with the other ingredients involved in the
targeted performance. Coaches are and remain the head cooking chiefs and sport
sciences an indispensable tool.
1.2
See the Big Picture First
You can’t see the forest for the tree
When aiming at understanding and contributing to improve sport performance, a
scientiﬁc approach going from macroscopic to microscopic levels is of great
interest. It consists in starting the analyses from the performance itself, its different
integrative biomechanical factors (when focusing on physical qualities) to then
study the biological or neurophysiological underlying mechanisms. This allows a
clear understanding, in a logical order, of the relationships between performance,
the mechanical requirements of the underlying tasks and the associated mechanical
outputs, the various athlete’s individual intrinsic qualities involved and in ﬁne, the
corresponding biological features. In the ﬁeld of applied sport sciences, this implies
to use a back-and-forth approach between ﬁelds of practice and laboratory. Most of
time, the initial basic questions come from sport practitioners on the ﬁeld regarding
what they need to better know to improve performance. Some of these interroga-
tions require laboratory approaches using standardized experimental protocols,
biomechanical or physiological models, mathematics, physics, and statistics. This
inevitably puts some distance between research and the actual performance on the
ﬁeld, but this makes possible to ﬁnd some answers which have then direct practical
applications for performance optimization and training. This book will thus present
some theoretical approaches, mainly based on biomechanical models, which bring
some new insights contributing, at least in part, to answer practical issues for sport
practitioners. These theoretical answers are associated to validation by comparison
to experimental data and practical applications supporting their relevance and
interest in training and testing.
1.3
Simple Models, Simple Methods
The simpler the model, the clearer it is which of its characteristics are essential to the
observed effect
Alexander (2003)
The originality of the biomechanical models presented in this book and asso-
ciated to the above-mentioned macroscopic approaches, is to correctly explain
human performance from the fewest variables possible. This philosophy of such
models is well illustrated by the words of Robert McNeill Alexander in an interview
presented in the “Questions and Answers” section of Current Biology journal in
1
Introduction
3


<!-- Page 11 -->
2006 (Alexander 2006): “Use simple mathematical models for clarifying arguments
and generating hypotheses. Don’t try to make your model as complex as the animal
it represents: you will never succeed, and the effort may be counterproductive
because it is often not apparent which features of a complex model are responsible
for the effects it shows. On the other hand, if a model is simple enough, you can tell
what caused the effect. I have found optimization models particularly useful —
models that seek the best possible structure or behaviour. For example, if a model
tells me that a particular pattern of behaviour is the best possible in given cir-
cumstances, and if real animals do something quite different, that suggests that I
may have failed to understand the issues at stake”. Such biomechanical models do
not aim at representing all the biological structures forming human body, but rather
at characterizing in the simplest way possible1 the actual mechanical behavior of the
different part of the body acting in sport performance. These models allow sport
scientists and practitioners to better identify and understand the different integrative
biomechanical factors affecting human performances (dynamics approach). When
using these models in the opposite way, i.e. the model’s input is the performance
and the outputs are the underlying mechanical properties (inverse dynamics
approach), they can be used to develop simple methods to evaluate some individual
mechanical properties without any speciﬁc dynamometers or other laboratory
devices. This book will present both ways to use such biomechanical models. First,
it will present some models that led to some original concepts to better understand
the biomechanical factors affecting sport performances. Second, this book will
present simple methods to assess, easily and out of labs, mechanical properties of an
athlete’s neuromuscular system or biomechanical features of human locomotion.
Theoretical background, validation against “gold standard” methods and practical
applications in training will be detailed in the following chapters.
References
Alexander RM (2003) Modelling approaches in biomechanics. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol
Sci 358(1437):1429–1435
Alexander RM (2006) R. McNeill Alexander. Curr Biol 16(14):R519–R520
1The simplest as possible in respect of the initial question at which the model is used to answer.
4
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino

