# Chapter 2: Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics in Cycling


<!-- Page 13 -->
Chapter 2
Maximal Force-Velocity
and Power-Velocity Characteristics
in Cycling: Assessment and Relevance
Sylvain Dorel
Abstract Cycling is a “common” task considered relatively intuitive and hence
easy to perform by everybody. Although pedaling represents a typical multi-joint
movement characterized by several degrees of freedom, in contrast with running it
can be regarded as less complex since the ﬁxed trajectory of the pedals and the
mechanical coupling between both legs constrain lower-extremity movements to a
higher degree. In this chapter we will deﬁne a macroscopic model to measure
maximal cycling power output and typical measurements involved in stationary
ergometer conditions and also on the ﬁeld in Sect. 2.5. We will give some reference
data and discuss how best to interpret the force, power and velocity indexes
obtained from this testing procedure. Force-velocity and power-velocity relation-
ships allow reliable assessment of maximal power capabilities and its two force and
velocity components in cycling. Provided that the proper methodology and advice
presented in this chapter are used, the different indexes extracted from these
relationships give very useful information on (i) evaluating lower-limb muscle
function, (ii) monitoring speciﬁc and general strength training effects and
(iii) interpreting and characterizing muscle involvement in the efforts performed on
the ﬁeld within the training or competition context. Use of a stationary ergometer is
now straightforward and particularly suited for each individuals and hence remains
the reference method to use, yet portable power meters are now accessible and will
become more and more suitable.
S. Dorel (&)
Faculty of Sport Sciences, Laboratory “Movement, Interactions,
Performance”, University of Nantes, 25 bis, Boulevard Guy Mollet,
EA 4334, BP 72206, Nantes, 44322 cedex 3, France
e-mail: Sylvain.Dorel@univ-nantes.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_2
7


<!-- Page 14 -->
2.1
Introduction
Cycling is a “common” task considered relatively intuitive and hence easy to
perform by everybody. After the French engineers Michaux and Lallement added
the pedals, the pedaling machine (i.e., the ﬁrst “bicycle”) appeared at the beginning
of the 20th century with approximately the same general design as today’s bicycle.
Currently, it is more and more widely used in daily life (e.g., to go to work) as well
as for recreational, ﬁtness, sport or rehabilitation activity. From a biomechanical
point of view, cycling consists in propelling (or “driving”) a system (cyclist and its
bicycle or an inertia ﬂywheel) using alternative actions of both legs on a crank
system in rotation. Although pedaling represents a typical multi-joint movement
characterized by several degrees of freedom, in contrast with running it can be
regarded as less complex since the ﬁxed trajectory of the pedals and the mechanical
coupling between both legs constrain lower- extremity movements to a greater
extent.
Historically, the maximal power produced during sprint cycling has been con-
sidered an indirect measurement of “maximal anaerobic power”; that is, ability
related to the rate of energy turnover from anaerobic metabolism (specially related
to the phosphagen pathway). The last three decades have shown it is now well
established that this ability is more representative of the global muscle function of
the lower limbs and mechanical muscle properties. Hence explosive cycling
movement is greatly determined by the maximal force and power capabilities of the
muscles involved which directly depend on the well-known force-velocity rela-
tionship (Hill 1938). As a consequence, at the macroscopic level, it is well estab-
lished that the total maximal power produced during cycling is similarly very well
characterized by both force-velocity and a power-velocity relationships. Although
these relationships reﬂect a range of other neuro-mechanical properties (see Chap. 3),
they allow the determination of useful indexes of global power, force and velocity
abilities that provide interesting simple tools to evaluate athletes and at the same time
monitor speciﬁc and general strength training effects.
In this chapter we will deﬁne a macroscopic model to measure maximal cycling
power output and typical measurements found under stationary ergometer condi-
tions and also on the ﬁeld in Sect. 2.5. We will provide some reference data and
discuss the best way to interpret the force, power and velocity indexes obtained
from this testing procedure. Additionally, we make a special attempt to provide the
main practical tips to ensure validity and precision in the determinations of
the different indexes in order to encourage a good interpretation of the results in the
context of training and sport performance.
8
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 15 -->
2.2
Measurement of Mechanical Output (Force, Velocity
and Power) During Sprint Pedaling
The system involved in riding an ergometer is generally represented by a crankset
and the associated wheel in rotation on which external forces are applied. Then the
“external power” produced by the subject can be considered part of the power
output used to overcome external resistances (i.e., different frictions and the weight
or inertia of the system) or linked to the changes in total mechanical energy of this
system (i.e., kinetic energy in this case). This external power (Ps) is therefore
directly related to the torque generated at the level of the crank axis (TFeff, which
only depends on the perpendicular component of the total force Feff produced on the
pedals) and the crank angular velocity (ɷ, in rads−1, Eq. 2.1). In practice, Ps can
also be calculated considering the effective force (Feff, in N, by dividing torque by
the crank length in m) and velocity (V, in ms −1) at the pedal level (Eq. 2.2).
Ps ¼ TFeff  x
ð2:1Þ
Ps ¼ Feff  V
ð2:2Þ
Many methods have been developed in the last 30 years to calculate the two
components of Ps (Driss and Vandewalle 2013) and two main modalities were
used: isokinetic (i.e., control of pedaling rate and direct measurement of force with
sensors in the crank or pedal; Mc Cartney et al. 1983b; Sargeant et al. 1981) and the
more common isoinertial condition (i.e., control of the external resistance and
inertia parameters of the ﬂywheel and measurement of its velocity and acceleration;
Dorel et al. 2005; Hautier et al. 1996; Martin et al. 1997; Vandewalle et al. 1987).
All these methodologies use the same general equations of movement for mea-
suring the torque produced by the subject (TFeff, Eq. 2.3) and then the power (Ps,
Eq. 2.4):
TFeff ¼ I  a þ TFric
ð2:3Þ
Ps ¼ I  a  x þ TFric  x
ð2:4Þ
where TFric represents the sum of the resistive torques applied on the system in
rotation (friction or magnetic resistance in most cases); I is the moment of inertia of
this system (in kg.m2); and a is its angular acceleration (in rads−2). Historically this
equation has been used on friction-loaded cycle ergometers (e.g., Monark) and then
considered the ﬂywheel as the system in rotation. Instead of the torque and angular
velocity at the crank, the values are in this case expressed referring to the ﬂywheel
axis. Ultimately, in studies using the Monark ergometer (Hautier et al. 1996; Morin
and Belli 2004; Vandewalle et al. 1987), force and velocity are expressed in
components corresponding to the forces applied at the periphery of the ﬂywheel
(in N or kg equivalent) and the velocity of the point of application of these forces
(v, in ms−1). So Eq. 2.4 becomes:
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
9


<!-- Page 16 -->
Ps ¼ I=R2  a  v þ FFric  v
ð2:5Þ
where R represents the radius of the ﬂywheel (in m), a the tangential acceleration
(in ms−2) and Ffric the friction force applied by the belt (generally measured by a
strain gauge) or the magnetic resistance (in N). Note that this last processing
methodology is reliable and convenient depending on the equipment resources.
However, taking into account the variability of the ergometer’s characteristics
(radius of the ﬂywheel, gear ratio…), it is not really useful to compare values of
force between the studies and the ergometers (e.g., the maximal force index, see
below). On the same issue, it is important to keep in mind that a slight but
non-negligible difference is observed between the power measured at the ﬂywheel
level and that measured directly by strain gauges at the crank or at the shoe-pedal
interface, depending on the losses induced by frictions in the chain, sprockets and
the different rotation axis (Driss and Vandewalle 2013).
During a sprint exercise, it is possible to monitor the force and then power output
produced provided that (i) the friction force applied and the velocity and acceler-
ation of the ﬂywheel (or the crank) are precisely measured and that (ii) the moment
of inertia of this ﬂywheel is known. The time course of force, velocity and power
during a single sprint of few seconds can be tracked, depending on the sampling
rate. Finally, the mean value on each pedal stroke or each complete cycle allows to
plot the crank velocity-time and power-time relationships (Fig. 2.1a–b), and also
the evolution of force and power in function of the velocity (generally expressed as
pedaling rate, Fig. 2.1c). These typical relationships are detailed in the next part.
This methodology was largely applied in the last twenty years and remains very
useful when using friction-inertial-loaded (Arsac et al. 1996; Dorel et al. 2003) or
only inertial-loaded (Martin et al. 1997) cycle ergometers. However other methods
were historically proposed and can still be used (see the two detailed reviews for
more information, (Cross et al. 2017; Driss and Vandewalle 2013)). Indeed, the ﬁrst
approach to assess the force-velocity in cycling was based on simpliﬁcation by
considering only the second part of the Eq. 2.5 (i.e. the power required to overcome
the braking force) omitting the power required to accelerate the ﬂywheel inertia
(Vandewalle et al. 1987). The power estimated by this methodology is valid only
when the acceleration is equal to zero, which is solely the case when the peak
velocity is reached during sprint performed in isoinertial condition. Then a single
couple of force-velocity (i.e. braking force-peak velocity) can be assessed per sprint.
It is necessary to repeat a series of six to ten sprints against progressively increasing
braking forces, to record different peak velocities and ﬁnally plot a force-velocity
relationship as well (Fig. 2.1c). Theoretically this approach remains reliable to
assess the maximal force- and power-velocity relationships and you can see on
Fig. 2.1c the good agreement between the F-V relationship resulted from “peak
velocity” method and the relationship resulted from the “reference” method (i.e.
Eq. 2.5). The advantage was that the material is very simple: the braking forces are
predetermined by known weights and only the peak ﬂywheel velocity should be
measured. However, the repetition of the 8–10 sprints can induce a signiﬁcant
10
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 17 -->
fatigue throughout the test session and the protocol assumes an absence of fatigue at
the time of the peak velocity occurrence which can be questionable in some cases
(see the next parts). Note that although there are still few people which propose to
use this methodology (i.e. only the power against the braking force) to estimate
Fig. 2.1 a Typical example of the time-course of the pedaling rate (or crank velocity) during a
force-velocity test on a Monark cycle ergometer: 4 short sprints against 4 braking forces (in kg at
the circumference of the ﬂywheel and equivalent resistive torque in Nm at the crank axis). Squares
correspond to the peak values and circles to the mean values on each complete cycle before.
b Time-power curves for the two extreme loads with the raw and ﬁltered data (grey lines) and the
same representation of the mean values on the ﬁve ﬁrst complete crank cycles and at the peak
velocities. c Mean value of torque, pedaling rate and power on these complete cycles (ﬁrst 3 s of
each sprint) can be used to plot torque- and power-velocity relationships. Note the good match in
this example between the shape of these relationships for the two methods: one that considers only
the peak velocity values of the 4 distinct sprints of panel a (squares: power corresponds to the
product of peak velocity and braking force) and the other that considers all the cycles of the 2
sprints of panel b (circle: power measurement also takes into account the force to accelerate the
ﬂywheel inertia during the ﬁrst phase of the sprint). Adapted from Driss and Vandewalle (2013)
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
11


<!-- Page 18 -->
power also during the acceleration phase, this approach should be logically ruled
out due to its invalidity (Morin and Belli 2004).
Finally, with the development of a new generation of commercialized electronic
cycle ergometers (e.g., SRMTM, Lode Excalibur SportTM), especially from the last
ﬁfteen years, they are increasingly used. With these devices, the estimation of the
resistive torque (braking or magnetic) is no longer required because of the direct
measurement by strain gauges of the force at the crank or the pedal level (Buttelli
et al. 1996; Capmal and Vandewalle 1997; Dorel et al. 2010). Moreover, the setting
of these ergometers has been particularly improved to be better adapted to the size
and muscle capacities of all athletes (Dorel et al. 2012; Gardner et al. 2007). For this
reason, the next parts of the chapter presenting in detail the methodology and
interpretation of force- and power-velocity capabilities will often use data recorded
with this type of ergometry.
As for all biomechanical models aiming at simplifying the complex multi-joint
movement to facilitate its interpretation, this macroscopic model of external power
output measurement in cycling implies several assumptions:
• From a mechanical standpoint cycling remains a double task: (i) moving the
leg segments in such a way that the foot moves on a circular trajectory;
(ii) producing torque at the crank levels. The work produced by the muscles is
then transformed into mechanical work at the crank level but also used to move
the leg segments (Driss and Vandewalle 2013; Kautz and Hull 1993). Therefore,
it is important to keep in mind that pedal force measured at the shoe-pedal
interface can be decomposed into a muscular component due directly to the
intersegmental net joint torques and a non-muscular component due to gravi-
tational and inertial effects of the segments.
• This cyclic movement of the lower extremity requires a speciﬁc coordination of
several lower-limb muscles with a lot of co-activation between synergists as
well as antagonist muscles (see next chapter, Dorel et al. 2012; Hug and Dorel
2009). In this line, despite a maximal involvement, the maximal activation level
is not veriﬁed for all the muscles and the cyclic characteristics of the task induce
that mechanical output is also governed by excitation-relaxation kinetics
(Neptune and Kautz 2001).
• This movement is classically considered by the scientiﬁc and coaching com-
munities as a useful evaluation of the human dynamic muscle function of the
lower limb extensor muscles in a “concentric” mode. However, some muscles
could theoretically act in different modalities of contraction (particularly the
bi-articular muscles), and also operate in different range of their force-length
relationship.
Note that all of these points will be further examined and discussed in the next
chapter (see Chap. 3 for more information).
12
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 19 -->
2.3
Maximal Force- and Power-Velocity Relationships
in Cycling
2.3.1
Testing and Processing
Sprint exercise on cycle ergometer is widely used to evaluate force and power
characteristics of the lower limbs. These muscle capacities can be accurately
measured on a cycle ergometer, using the well-known “force-velocity” test that
consists of performing 3 brief all-out exercises of 5-s duration against difference
resistances. The corresponding resistive torques generally applied are 0, 0.5–0.8,
and 1–1.8 Nm.kg−1 body mass depending on the body mass and level of expertise.
Actually, these values of resistance are indicative and may be adapted in line with
the general principle of allowing subjects to attain a large range of pedaling rates
over the cumulative three bouts. Classically the value of force, velocity and power
are averaged on a period corresponding to a full crank cycle (or a half cycle, i.e. one
downstroke) and then 4 to 10–12 couples of force and velocity values are obtained
from each sprint, allowing modeling the relationships with a large number of points
(Fig. 2.2).
Whatever the approach to measure the mechanical data, the velocity is prefer-
entially expressed in pedaling rate at the crank level (in rpm). Then force-velocity
relationship obtained during pedaling is classically presented as a maximal torque
(or effective force)-pedaling rate relationship which is very well ﬁtted by a linear
regression model (Dorel et al. 2003, 2005; Driss and Vandewalle 2013; Driss et al.
2002; Hautier et al. 1996; Hintzy et al. 1999; Vandewalle et al. 1987). The linear
relationship obtained (Eq. 2.6) enables assessment of Vmax and Fmax, which have
the dimensions of maximal pedaling rate at the zero force axis and the effective
force corresponding to a zero pedaling rate, respectively (Fig. 2.2; Eq. 2.7).
Fig. 2.2 Typical force-velocity (left) and power-velocity (right) relationships of an elite track
cyclist, ﬁtted using linear and quadratic regressions, respectively and considering mean crank cycle
values obtained from three sprints of 4-s duration. Determination of maximal power (Pmax),
optimal pedaling rate (Vopt), maximal pedaling rate (Vmax), and maximal effective force (Fmax)
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
13


<!-- Page 20 -->
F ¼ a V þ Fmax
ð2:6Þ
Vmax ¼ Fmax  a1
ð2:7Þ
Maximal power generation is described by a polynomial (2nd order,)
power-velocity relationship (Eq. 2.8) with a maximum value (Pmax) reached at an
optimal cycling rate (Vopt) and hence at an optimal force (Fopt).
P ¼ aV2 þ bV þ c
ð2:8Þ
Pmax can be determined directly basing on the F-V relationship with the fol-
lowing equations:
Pmax ¼ Vopt:Fopt;
Pmax ¼ 0:5Vmax:0:5Fmax;
Pmax ¼ 0:25:Vmax:Fmax
ð2:9a–cÞ
where Vopt and Fopt are expressed in ofﬁcial unit (rads−1 and Nm at the crank axis
or ms−1 and N at the pedal, respectively).
Vopt and Pmax can be determined based on Eq. 2.8 (P-V relationship) with the
following equation:
Vopt ¼ b
2a
ð2:10Þ
Pmax ¼ a 
b
2a

2
þ b 
b
2a


þ c
ð2:11Þ
Practically, the relation between the power and velocity is fundamental because
it means that (i) an athlete can reach the actual maximal value of power (Pmax) only
at an optimal trade-off between force and velocity (Eq. 2.9a–c), and (ii) the max-
imal power-generating capacity dramatically decreases when velocity signiﬁcantly
moves away below or above this Vopt value (Fig. 2.2). Interestingly, the more the
target power is below Pmax value (i.e. submaximal values under the curve), the
more the possibilities to produce this power on a large range of different pedaling
rates (and hence force) exist. On the training and testing viewpoint, the
power-velocity relationship implies that Pmax can be reached around to the small
range of pedaling rates corresponded to almost Vopt value. It means that the higher
Vopt the more the athletes should pedal at a high cadence to be able to reach their
maximal power (Fig. 2.3). Then even if two athletes with different Vopt have a large
difference in their absolute Pmax (e.g, 12 rpm and *200 W in the example of
Fig. 2.3), this discrepancy in power production could be very lower or even dis-
appear on the ﬁeld if the effort is performed at speciﬁc pedaling rate advantageous
for the athlete with the higher Vopt (e.g., at almost 180 rpm on Fig. 2.3).
However, it is important to keep in mind that due the mechanical fundamental
laws, even if the mechanical constraints (e.g., effects of gravity, rolling resistance,
14
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 21 -->
air friction, moment of inertia of the system) can directly inﬂuence the speed of the
system on the ﬁeld (i.e. the cyclist + bicycle), they do not directly act on the
capacity to reach maximal power output per se if the pedaling rate can be adjusted.
Indeed, contrary to running for example, it is easier to change the ratio between
speed and pedaling rate by using a gear ratio system on the ﬁeld. Consequently, the
athlete by changing the gear ratio can adjust his pedaling rate to be close to Vopt
conditions and then to be able to reach his maximal power output in very different
mechanical situations (speed, external resistances…etc…).
2.3.2
Meaning of the Indexes Extracted
from the Relationships
The force- and power-velocity relationships allow the determination of several
useful parameters (i.e. indexes) for normative evaluation as well as training mon-
itoring. One often tries to link these indexes with performance factors in different
explosives disciplines requiring power of the lower limbs (Dorel et al. 2005; Morin
et al. 2002) and to describe the alteration of these indexes with training or with age
to better understand the loss of power capacity and functional performance in
elderly population (Bonnefoy et al. 1998; Martin et al. 2000). Then, it is important
to state on the interpretation of the different parameters and how each can account
to the lower limb muscle function.
Fig. 2.3 Determination of the torque- and power-velocity relationships of two typical elite
sprinters in cycling with large differences in torque and velocity capabilities: one (white circle)
with very high value of maximal torque (Tmax: *270 Nm) giving him a higher value of maximal
power (Pmax: 1800 W), the other (black diamond) with extremely high value of maximal pedaling
rate (Vmax: 285 rpm) giving him a high Pmax also (despite lower: 1650 W). Observe the greater
discrepancy between power capabilities of both athletes at the pedaling lower than Vopt (60–70 to
130 rpm) and the lower discrepancy at higher pedaling rates and even an absence of difference at
pedaling rates around 180–200 rpm
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
15


<!-- Page 22 -->
Optimal and maximal pedaling rate. Due to the linear model, both indexes
correspond to the same global velocity capability (i.e. Vopt
=
0.5 Vmax). The
pedaling rate being directly linked to the pedal speed it inﬂuences indirectly the
angular velocity of the main joints (especially the hip and the knee) and hence is
considered to inﬂuence also the muscle shortening velocity. Therefore, Vopt is often
considered as the condition where the majority of the muscles involved are
shortening near their optimal velocity (Sargeant 1994; Zatsiorsky 2008). In this line
it is interesting to note that Vopt values reported in subjects specialists in “explosive”
performances (and hence presumably characterized by a higher percentage of fast
twitch muscle ﬁbers) are classically higher than those reported in endurance athletes
(Buttelli et al. 1996; Davies et al. 1984; Dorel et al. 2003, 2005; Gardner et al.
2007; Hintzy et al. 1999; Sargeant et al. 1981; Vandewalle et al. 1987). The optimal
pedaling rate range between almost 90–100 rpm for extremely low values up to
140–145 rpm for extremely high values. Interestingly, this link between the pro-
portion of fast twitch ﬁbers and Vopt was experimentally demonstrated in two
subjects (McCartney et al. 1983a) and ten healthy speciﬁcally trained subjects
(Hautier et al. 1996) conﬁrming that this high proportion of type II ﬁbers, at least on
the knee extensor muscle, may be one factor associated with a high pedaling rate for
maximal power. As depicted on Fig. 2.4, the fact that Vopt is gradually impaired
with advancing aging (Bonnefoy et al. 1998; Martin et al. 2000) can be conﬁdently
related to the well-known deterioration of the maximal unloaded shortening
velocity of muscle ﬁbers with aging (Power et al. 2016) and further suggest that
ﬁber type distribution inﬂuences, at least partly, the Vopt ability.
Nevertheless due to the characteristics of the movement, other factors clearly
inﬂuence the maximal pedaling rate. Among them, we can point speciﬁcally the
muscle coordination and the activation dynamics (see next chapter for more
details). As cycle frequency increases, the capacity of nervous system to activate
and deactivate the muscles increase in importance, and then have a signiﬁcant
Fig. 2.4 Typical
power-velocity of an young
and an old individual
illustrating the great
difference in maximal power
due to both a decrease in
maximal force and velocity
capabilities (note the decrease
in optimal velocity, Bonnefoy
et al. (1998))
16
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 23 -->
inﬂuence on force production additionally to the intrinsic force- and power-velocity
characteristics of the muscles (Bobbert et al. 2015; Caiozzo and Baldwin 1997;
Neptune and Kautz 2001; van Soest and Casius 2000). Moreover, the coordination
between the muscles seems to have a signiﬁcant impact on the capacity to continue
to produce a high force at pedaling rate higher than Vopt (Samozino et al. 2007) and
is even more critical at extreme pedaling rate (Dorel et al. 2014).
Optimal and maximal effective force (or crank torque). Due to the linear
model, both indexes corresponds the same global qualities of force (i.e. Fopt = 0.5
Fmax). Fmax is the theoretical maximal “isometric” force produced on the pedals by
both legs. This data is not frequently reported in the literature compared to Pmax and
often expressed in different units (braking force at the ﬂywheel, crank torque or
effective force applied on the pedals) making difﬁcult to compare the values. By
referring to data directly observed or basing on the Pmax and Vopt values we can
state that Fmax values expressed in torque range between almost 115–120 Nm for
extremely low values (unpublished data: recreational or endurance road cyclists or
triathletes) up to 300–320 Nm for extremely higher values (unpublished data:
world-class BMX and track sprint male cyclists). This index is clearly considered as
reﬂecting the maximal force ability of the main lower limb extensor muscles and
then as a good indicator of maximal strength. In this line, signiﬁcant relationships
have been demonstrated between Fmax and different indexes of speciﬁc maximal
isometric or isokinetic peak torque (i.e. between 0 and 240° s−1) of the knee
extensors on single-joint ergometer when data were expressed in absolute units or
normalized to the quadriceps mass (Driss et al. 2002). Moreover, Fopt and Fmax
were signiﬁcantly related to thigh muscle area or volume determined from
tomodensitometry (Linossier et al. 1996; McCartney et al. 1983a). Finally, a similar
link was also reported with the lean leg volume (estimated by anthropometry using
Jones and Pearson’s technique Jones and Pearson 1969) in a relative homogeneous
population of elite track sprint cyclists (r = 0.77, p < 0.01, Dorel et al. 2005).
Maximal power. Theoretically maximal power depends on both force and
velocity capabilities. Pmax values measured in very different populations range
between 500–600 W/10 Wkg-1 and 2100 W/22 Wkg-1 (Arsac et al. 1996; Dorel
et al. 2005; Driss and Vandewalle 2013; Gardner et al. 2007; Hintzy et al. 1999;
Martin et al. 1997; Vandewalle et al. 1987) up to almost extremely high values of
2400–2500 W and 25–26 Wkg-1 (unpublished data on world-class BMX and track
sprint male cyclists). These extreme values are logically recorded on subjects
exhibiting low (almost 100 rpm) and high Vopt (almost 135–140 rpm) respectively
(in relation with the proportion of fast twitch ﬁbers). In this line it has been reported
signiﬁcant relationship between Pmax and Vopt in quite heterogeneous population
(Arsac et al. 1996; Hintzy et al. 1999). However, the *40% difference in “velocity”
capability is dramatically lower compared to the *300% difference in Pmax. It
should therefore keep in mind that despite importance of velocity, force capability
is deﬁnitively the main key factor that explains such great differences in Pmax
between subjects. In this line, no relationship was reported between Pmax and Vopt in
homogeneous elite track cycling sprinters while a strong relationship (r = 0.92,
p < 0.001) was observed with Fmax (Dorel et al. 2005). In the same way, a lot of
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
17


<!-- Page 24 -->
studies highlighted direct correlation (Fig. 2.5) between Pmax and indices of muscle
mass or lean leg of thigh volume (Linossier et al. 1996; Martin et al. 1997; Pearson
et al. 2006) and interestingly some of them reported the same statistical signiﬁcance
for the relationship between strength indexes of knee extensors and Pmax than that
obtained with Fmax ability (Driss et al. 2002).
What about the improvement possibilities by training? Based on the afore-
mentioned literature and a longitudinal follow-up of elite track cyclists in the last
15 years with the French Federation of Cycling, it is reasonable to think that
strength capacities are the best candidate for improvement power at both short and
long terms. It is in agreement with the impressive increase of muscle mass and the
maximal force measured in strength and conditioning movements (e.g., squat
exercise) observed on the athletes throughout their career. Moreover, it is also
corroborated by the concomitant alteration classically observed in maximal force
and power in cycling and the muscle mass and force indexes of the athletes in
periods of detraining or reprise of training. In the same time, the alteration of Vopt or
Vmax are note really noticeable (between these periods or throughout the career).
The question is: does it means that velocity capabilities are not important and
cannot be improved? Three arguments suggest that the question is not so obvious
and the answer is likely no. First, the extremely highly powerful athletes are also
those that exhibit the highest Vopt values (e.g. between 135 up to 145 rpm for the
best 4–5 elite sprint track and BMX cyclists performing all at the highest inter-
national level; unpublished personal data). Basically, compared to an athlete A with
Pmax = 2000 W and Vopt = 130 rpm an athlete B with the same maximal force
but with a Vopt = 140 rpm directly beneﬁts from almost additional 150 W at Pmax.
Second, even rarely, new young adult athletes can sometimes show non negligible
increase of Vopt (*10 rpm) in early years of training; perhaps linked to an
improvement of muscle coordination. Thirdly, although the gain of Vopt are limited
(certainly mainly due to the inﬂuence of heredity on the muscle typology), we know
that possible change in a range of 5–8 rpm can appear over the time (as a result of a
Fig. 2.5 The relationship
between maximal power
measured during a
force-velocity test and the
estimated lean thigh volume
(n = 13): peak power
obtained during the cycle in
black, mean power produced
over the complete cycle in
white, Martin et al. (1997)
18
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 25 -->
velocity-speciﬁc training block or related to a period of very high level of expertise
during the career). For all these reasons, it appears that velocity capabilities are
non-negligible and that testing Vmax remains interesting and should still be con-
sidered for talent identiﬁcation and development (Tofari et al. 2016).
2.4
Methodological Consideration and Practical Advices
2.4.1
Period of Averaging to Draw F-V or P-V
Relationships and Duration of the Sprint
Mean cycle versus peak instantaneous values. As previously described, the
phase/period for averaging values on cycle ergometer classically corresponds to a
full crank cycle because matching with the period of the cyclic movement (i.e.
during which each muscles are activated on one phase and deactivate on another).
As movement is done by both legs in antiphase it is also often proposed to average
the data only on one half cycle which corresponds to only one pedal stroke (i.e. the
downstroke of one leg + upstroke of the contralateral leg) while a full cycle cor-
responds to two pedal strokes (i.e. downstroke and upstroke of each legs in anti-
phase). Note that if the different measurement sensors and the acquisition system
allow to record quasi instantaneous values it is then possible to describe the torque
proﬁle inside each pedal cycle (see the next chapter). As a consequence, in rare
cases (specially in former studies) the peak “instantaneous” values of force and
power reach in each pedaling cycle are reported (Beelen and Sargeant 1991;
McCartney et al. 1983a; Sargeant et al. 1981), these values being clearly not
comparable with the classical mean values on cycle (i.e. almost 50% higher).
Sprint duration and inﬂuence of the occurrence of early fatigue. Practically,
the choice of the period of time (or number of cycles) to be included for each bout is
an important question to draw fatigue-free force- and power-velocity relationships.
During a maximal sprint performed at a constant pedaling rate (to avoid the effect of
the pedaling rate confounding factor, Gardner et al. 2009; Tomas et al. 2010) the
power output can be maintained during a very short period of almost 4–5 s
depending on velocity (higher pedaling rate inducing a higher decrease) and cer-
tainly the athletes’ individual proﬁle (endurance vs. sprint athletes) (Beelen and
Sargeant 1991; Dorel et al. 2003; McCartney et al. 1983a). It is therefore important
to remove frome the analysis all the values for which fatigue potentially already
occurs at the end of the sprint: after 3–4 s for low pedaling rates (50–120 rpm) and
maximally after 3 s for high pedaling rates (120–250 rpm). On the other hand, it is
possible to include more data (4–5 or 5–6 s) keeping in mind that the Pmax and
associated Vmax resulted from the relationships would then represent a slight dif-
ferent capability (e.g., 5–8%) also already accounting a fatigue resistance ability
(Fig. 2.6).
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
19


<!-- Page 26 -->
2.4.2
Quality of the F-V and P-V Models: “Calculated”
Versus “True” Data
As a whole, the reliability of the force-velocity test is well established (Jaafar et al.
2015) and we can be even more conﬁdent for data obtained on athletes.
Nevertheless, to go a step further in the use of the indexes, some advices can be
serve. The power of the linear and quadratic models to estimate useful values of
Pmax and Vopt and others indexes logically depends on the number of points, the
capacity to obtain points on a large range of pedaling rates below and above Vopt
and the coefﬁcient of determination (R2). One can consider that the latter should be
at least equal to 0.80–0.85 but it might be better to obtain a coefﬁcient higher than
0.9–0.95 to enable valid assessments. Figure 2.6 illustrates three typical examples
of P-V relationships for which the model ﬁts the data very well (i.e. extremely high
R2 values: from 0.968 to 0.982) and the Pmax values nicely represent the differences
in the power capacity of the three subjects. Beyond that, the visual inspection of
data
in
respect
to
the
ﬁtted
curve
remains
important
to
avoid
some
over-interpretation. The gold standard should correspond to the typical example A
for which both Pmax and Vopt extracted from the model exactly correspond to the
real values obtained. For the example B, while Pmax remains very reliable (only
1.1% of difference between Pmax and the mean of the three higher power values:
PPeak), it appears that Vopt determined by the model (120 rpm) is partly
Fig. 2.6 Left: Effects of taking into account the power values produced during the ﬁrst 3 s
(white) versus the ﬁrst 5 s (white + black) of the three sprints performed during F-V testing
session. Despite an absence of a great inﬂuence on the maximal power estimation, black points
illustrate an effect of early fatigue for this individual leading to a signiﬁcant underestimation of the
maximal velocity and the power at the high pedaling rates (and likely an overestimation of the
maximal force, not illustrated here). Right: typical example of P-V relationships for 3 subjects
illustrating the importance of visual inspection of data in addition to the coefﬁcient of
determination of the model (R2). Maximal power (Pmax), optimal velocity (Vopt) extracted from the
model, and mean of the three higher power values (PPeak, bracket) and the associated velocity
(VPpeak) for each subject are as follows: (A) Pmax = 912 W, Vopt = 119 rpm; R2 = 0.977; Ppeak =
900 W at VPpeak = 121 rpm; (B) Pmax = 1182 W, Vopt = 120 rpm; R2 = 0.968; Ppeak = 1195 W at
VPpeak = 105 rpm; (C) Pmax = 1760 W, Vopt = 129 rpm; R2 = 0.982; Ppeak = 1828 W at VPpeak =
133 rpm. See details of interpretation in the text
20
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 27 -->
overestimated in the sense that Ppeak is almost reached at a 12.5% lower pedaling
rate (around 105 rpm). That means that the athlete B is actually not prevented
from producing his maximal power for pedaling rates around 100 rpm as it is
predicted by the quadratic model. For the athlete C, Pmax assessed by the model is
almost 50 W lower than Ppeak which corresponds to a non-negligible difference of
almost 3%.
Consequently, in the context of the longitudinal follow-up of training it can be
advised to primary consider Pmax, Fmax and Vopt to better quantify gains in force and
velocity capacities in response to the training period. In the same time, in the cases
where modeling has the aforementioned limitations it is advisable to refer to real
values for some practical application: (i) for choosing the suitable gear ratio to adapt
pedaling rate with the goal to maximize the power during a sprint on the ﬁeld (for
example for the cyclist B) or (ii) for comparing and better interpreting the peak
power obtained using powermeter on the ﬁeld in comparison with the maximal
power obtained during the stationary cycle ergometer testing procedure (for
example for the cyclist C). Finally, note that P-V model often used a more con-
strained equation by setting the y-intercept as 0 (i.e. constant c = 0, in all the
ﬁgures presented in this chapter). This process can slightly inﬂuence the capacity to
ﬁt the true data but is interesting to extrapolate more realistic power at extreme
cadences (low or high). So, that is important to control for inter and intra-individual
comparisons.
2.4.3
Main Factors to Control that may inﬂuence Maximal
Power Output
Different parameters can inﬂuence the force and/or the velocity produced on the
pedals and the question is to know whether it might alter the maximal power
capability. Among them, the seat height and the crank length, the nature of the
shoe-pedal interface and the use of a standing versus seating position are the main
recognized factors but they do not act on the same manner and with the same extent
on the power output. Rather than presenting a detail analysis of these factors, the
purpose here is just to insist on their main effect, in order to (i) select them
appropriately and (ii) control these parameters in both the context of longitudinal
follow-up of training and evaluation/detection of athletes.
Ergometer setup: seat height and crank length. Seat conﬁguration (seat tube
angle and height) can theoretically inﬂuence the pedal power by altering the lower
limbs kinematics (speciﬁcally the range of motion of each joints) and ultimately the
force produced by each muscle groups. However, by simulation (Rankin and
Neptune 2010) it was demonstrated that the inﬂuence of seat tube angle is actually
limited (i.e. almost 1% for a wide range of 65°–110°) when considering only the
classical cycling conﬁguration (i.e. not the recumbent cycling). For these authors,
the seat height has a greater impact and they proposed an optimal value
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
21


<!-- Page 28 -->
corresponded to 102% of greater trochanter height (and an average knee ﬂexion
angle of 101.7° with min = 59.6° at TDC and max = 153.6° at TDC). Actually and
despite the more and more popularity of the bike-ﬁtting consulting activity, the
setting of these parameters is not obvious. The problem is that too many parameters
interact to be able to conclude about an “optimization”: the anthropometric (seg-
ment lengths), the comfort (depending on the duration of the effort, the joint
ﬂexibility, etc.), the alteration of upper body posture and hence the aerodynamic
resistances, the degree of freedom allowed by the natural displacement of the hip on
the saddle. Moreover, it should be examined in concert with the choice of the crank
length since they can together alter the kinematics and then the range for force
generation by each joint based on the force-length relationship. Overall, different
trials (e.g. force-velocity test) should be done to experimentally conﬁrm that a
position is better for each individual.
By itself the crank length does not drastically inﬂuence the maximal power
(Martin and Spirduso 2001) because even if it changes the link between the force
and the velocity, Pmax is not deteriorated in a large range of crank lengths
(i.e., 145–195 mm). Although a standard crank length (170–175 mm) can therefore
be conﬁdently used in adults without concern of decreasing maximal power, an
optimal crank length of 20% of leg length was still suggested by these authors. It is
interesting for speciﬁc population such as very short athletes or the children and
adolescents (Martin et al. 2002). One practical consequence however is that the
optimal pedaling rate increases with the decrease of crank length. When different
bicycles equipped with different crank sizes are used by the athletes on the ﬁeld, it
is therefore interesting to take into account this inﬂuence to adapt pedaling rate and
gear ratio. Basing on the previous studies and the testing database of elite sprint
cyclists (personal unpublished data), we can conﬁdently state that a change in
10 mm of the crank length corresponds to almost an alteration of 4–5 rpm in Vopt.
Pedal and toe-clips. It was early demonstrated that during the upstroke phase of
the pedal, athletes can actively pull on the pedal to partially transmit additional
force to the crank (Beelen et al. 1994; Dorel et al. 2010; Martin and Brown 2009).
As a consequence, presence of toe-clips with straps or clipless pedals necessary
induce signiﬁcant change in the maximal values obtained during a torque-velocity
test (Capmal and Vandewalle 1997). Hence an almost 10–20% difference has been
reported in Pmax or Fmax in the last study depending on the shoe-pedal interface, and
we can reasonably think that it also signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the value of Vmax
(or Vopt). As we will discuss in the next chapter, the relative contribution of the
muscles involved in the ﬂexion phase should not be neglected especially during the
sprint compared to the submaximal exercise (Dorel et al. 2010; Driss and
Vandewalle 2013; Elmer et al. 2011). If the use of ﬂat pedals would theoretically be
interesting to better isolate on the work of the lower limb extensors only, it is not
advised for two reasons: it does not avoid a partial non-controlled contribution of
the contralateral leg during the ﬂexion phase (at least the partial effect of its weight)
and it remains very challenging to follow the pedal trajectory in this phase, espe-
cially at very high pedaling rates.
22
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 29 -->
Effect of body position: seating/standing. Standing position when sprinting
allows to produce a higher maximal power output compared to seating (Driss and
Vandewalle 2013; Hug et al. 2011; Reiser et al. 2002). This is mainly explained by
the effects of a higher participation of the body weight over the pedals, an additional
recruiting of the upper limb and trunk musculature (Turpin et al. 2017), along with
some positive adjustment of muscle coordination such like a higher or longer
recruitment of some muscles throughout the pedaling cycle (hamstring during the
extension-ﬂexion transition, quadriceps and gluteus maximus during the second
part of the pushing phase; (Hug et al. 2011) and personal unpublished data). In this
context, further studies are still needed to better elucidate all the biomechanical and
neuromuscular factors of inﬂuence. If some studies reported a gain of about 8–15%
(Driss and Vandewalle 2013; Reiser et al. 2002; Vandewalle et al. 1988) it is not
easy to state on a ‘typical’ mean value regarding the amount of the beneﬁt. Indeed,
the beneﬁt can be very different between the subjects and sometimes very poor
(e.g., 50 W = +2.2%, on an elite male sprint cyclist with 2250 W of Pmax in
seating position) or very important (e.g. 160 W = 16.7% on an elite female sprint
cyclist with 960 W of Pmax in seating position; unpublished personal data). It is
often accompanied by difference in the optimal velocity which are often slightly
lower (0–10 rpm) in standing position; however, it is again difﬁcult to draw up a
general rule because few subjects can also exhibit a slight higher Vopt in standing
position (e.g., elite BMX or sprint track riders). Maybe speciﬁc skills and segment
length can also partially explain this interindividual variability in the seating/
standing difference observed regarding the maximal power and velocity abilities.
Both values can have the same practical interest if the athlete rides in both positions
on the ﬁeld, but it is then more appropriate (and very recommended) to test cyclist
in the same position in laboratory and ﬁeld conditions to gain a better overview of
his capabilities.
2.5
Field Measurement in Ecological Condition
As detailed above, the force-velocity test on cycle ergometer is speciﬁc of the
cycling performance and then is a largely accepted method to describe and predict
the mechanical behavior of the cyclist in sprint condition on the ﬁeld. However, in
addition to this classical reference method, the use of additional “ﬁeld” data bring
real beneﬁts for both coaches and sports scientists:
• ﬁrstly, little changes in body conﬁguration can occur in ﬁeld condition (espe-
cially lateral oscillation of the cyclist and his bicycle commonly observed when
sprinting) and hence may slightly inﬂuence the power produced (Faria et al.
2005);
• consistent with that, this would be particularly right at very high level of force
during a sprint starting performance and then the classical stationary
force-velocity test does not perfectly evaluate the real-life practice speciﬁcally
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
23


<!-- Page 30 -->
for conditions at extremely high force and low cadence (i.e., lower than
70 rpm);
• additionally, power measurement allow today to better characterize the effort on
the ﬁeld, and to better identify and control the muscular quality worked during
training sessions (e.g., force or power predominance);
• ﬁnally, beyond all of that, the external resistance and mechanical constraints
applied on the cyclist on the ﬁeld are strongly different compared to the sta-
tionary force-velocity test and could be very diversiﬁed. Although that should
not impair the maximal power capability of the subject (except if optimal
velocity condition is not veriﬁed), it largely inﬂuences the relative contribution
of each resistance/constraint on the power demand and hence factors of per-
formance such like the maximal speed or the acceleration of the athlete.
2.5.1
Mathematical Model of Sprint Cycling
Since the ﬁrst work of di Prampero et al. (1979), different mathematical model were
developed to estimate the power produced on the ﬁeld by the cyclist. Historically,
the challenge was really to determine the power demand basing on the different
applied external resistances and the variation in the mechanical energy in order to
infer a reliable estimation of the muscular power produced by the athlete. Whatever
the model proposed (Martin et al. 2006, 1998; Olds 2001; Olds et al. 1993) that
corresponds to the power required to overcome air resistance and rolling resistance
and the power required to change the kinetic energy and/or the potential energy of
the system (Eq. 2.12):
P ¼ CdA  1
2  q  V3 þ l:Fn:V þ DEp
Dt þ DEk
Dt
ð2:12Þ
with CdA represents a coefﬁcient including both the effective frontal area and the
drag coefﬁcient of the system (cyclist + bicycle); q is the air density, µ is a global
coefﬁcient of friction, Fn is the normal force on the surface due to the weight of the
system, V, the velocity of the system cyclist + bicycle (in absence of wind) and
DEp and DEk the variation on the period of interest (Dt) of potential and kinetic
energy, respectively.
When looking in detail this equation it appears not simple to use this model to
evaluate maximal power of the cyclist in routine on the ﬁeld. Indeed, measuring (or
reliably estimating) the different coefﬁcients requires complex, expensive and less
accessible methodologies especially for the aerodynamic coefﬁcient (e.g., wind
tunnel), which often represents the most important factor due to the importance of
the air resistance with the increased speed. For that, it is possible to use
ﬁeld-derived values for modeling CdA and µ coefﬁcients (thanks to testing sessions
by means of a portable powermeter system, see the next part) and to apply the
24
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 31 -->
model to accurately estimate power during a maximal sprint cycling (Martin et al.
2006). Beyond this apparent difﬁculty, this modeling approach has signiﬁcant
practical applications for training and testing:
• for better characterizing the relative contribution of each external constraints in
the total power demand during a speciﬁc exercise (e.g., the power demand of
increasing the kinematic energy and concomitant power supply of decreasing
potential energy from the top of the turn during the acceleration phase of a
200 m ﬂying start performance on the track);
• for assessing aerodynamics issues and simulating how subtle changes in all the
constant included in the model (e.g., riding position, mass, tire pressure, con-
ﬁguration of the track or the road, environmental condition, etc.) and power of
the subject itself will inﬂuence cycling speed and in ﬁne the sprint performance;
• for avoiding misinterpretation and shortcut about the link between very high
speed and the amount of power output. For illustrating with a numerical
example, the model can estimate that an athlete of 80 kg sprinting at a mean
speed of 64.5 km.h-1 on a 5-s period (on the ﬂat and in absence of wind and
drafting) produce an additional power of almost 200 W when the exact initial
and ﬁnal instantaneous speeds on this period are 64 km.h-1 and 65 km.h-1,
respectively (i.e. very slight acceleration < 0.06.ms-2) than then in inverse
condition (i.e. 65 and 64 km h−1, respectively: slight deceleration). This is not
obvious to imagine that without modeling.
In line with the last point, the measurement interval on which all the kinematic
data can be measured practically (Dt: period of averaging the velocity, and on
which the variation of velocity and of the vertical position, h, are detected) directly
affects the capacity of model to account for rapid changes in power production
(which is crucial in sprint cycling). However the new technologies available to
measure the displacement speed (e.g., commercial high speed video, see Chaps. 4
and 5, and also the portable systems, see the next part of this chapter) are promising
opportunities to obtain a precise speed proﬁle of the athlete during a competition or
training/testing session. Finally, the condition on the ﬁeld can be organized to
simplify the model by limiting the number of variables that can contribute. For
practical testing session, it is easy to perform a sprint in starting-block condition to
have very low value of speed and on the ﬂat to omit the ﬁrst and the fourth
components of Eq. 2.12, respectively (Bertucci et al. 2005). This approach is
interesting to have a ﬁeld estimation of maximal force but it is more critical for
maximal power assessment if Vopt is not reached which would be probable if speed
is limited to 20 km h−1. The assessment of force- and power-velocity and their
associated indexes on the ﬁeld requires therefore additional equipment.
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
25


<!-- Page 32 -->
2.5.2
Direct Measurement with Portable System
As on cycle ergometer, new technologies available from the last decade allowed the
emergence of several portable devices to reliably measure the power output on the
ﬁeld. One main issue of the existing commercial powermeter systems (SRMTM,
PowertapTM, StagesTM, Garmin vectorTM, Look keo powerTM…) for determining
maximal power during explosive efforts remains their sensitivity and the sampling
rate. Some of them now fulﬁl these essential conditions: they have been validated
and store data at least at 1 Hz. That represents the minimum value to ensure a
sufﬁcient temporal resolution during explosive exercise to estimate a realistic
maximal value of power and associated torque and pedaling rate. As a consequence,
these tools begins to be used and raise interesting possibilities for training and
testing in sport performance (Gardner et al. 2009, 2007; Martin et al. 2007, 2006;
Menaspa et al. 2015a, b).
Valuable inputs regarding the sprint performance. As aforementioned,
recording the power and pedaling rate with these portable devices allow a better
understanding of the characteristics of the sprint effort done on the ﬁeld whatever
the discipline (track, road, BMX). During training sessions, it is a means to better
describe the power-velocity demand of a speciﬁc training session and in turn for
coaches a possibility to adjust the speed and gear ratio in order to preferentially
target a muscle quality to work (e.g. force-power vs. power-velocity). It can provide
a rapid post-exercise feedback on the involvement of the athletes. For long-lasting
sprint exercise (i.e. 10–30 s duration) the analysis gives additional information on
the capacity to resist to fatigue which is also a very valuable physiology-related
quality. Indeed the dissociation of the effect of the pedaling rate confounding factor
(on the time-course of power) represents a real beneﬁt to isolate the inﬂuence of
fatigue but also to characterize the interaction between these parameters (Gardner
et al. 2009; Tomas et al. 2010).
A very important advantage of these devices is they can be used in a competition
context. As for a speciﬁc training session the time course of the power and pedaling
rate during a race can be plotted (Fig. 2.7). For the example of the 200 m ﬂying
start performance depicted in details on this ﬁgure, it permits to identify the dif-
ferent phases of the effort and to characterize each of them in term of
force-velocity-power demand and fatigue. It could be a very useful input to also
understand the inﬂuence of external variables such like the conﬁguration of the
track (height, width and friction feature) and in turn to adjust the gear ratio but also
the individual pacing strategy to attempt to optimize the power production in one or
all the phases and hence the speed performance. All of these applications require to
express the data referring to the F-V and P-V relationships measured in the labo-
ratory condition (i.e. reference method) but we can wonder whether using power-
meter may also be an option to directly assess these relationships on the ﬁeld.
Assessment of F-V and P-V relationships. Theoretically, nothing prevents to
determine the global force- and power-velocity relationships with these tools. In
this line, a very good agreement was logically reported between “laboratory” and
26
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 33 -->
“ﬁeld” conditions regarding the force- and power-velocity relationships assessment
(Gardner et al. 2007). Despite some limitations (lack of data around and above the
optimal pedaling rate to draw the relationship) this study makes us conﬁdent on the
Fig. 2.7 Time-course of the speed, pedaling rate and power during a ﬂying 200-m time trial
measured during a world cup competition (female athlete, SRMTM pro system at 2 Hz). The
chronometric portion begins at the start line (time 0: dotted line) and the distance was performed in
11.3 s after this line. Three phases can be considered with the associated mean value obtained on each:
an initial acceleration phase (on the left, from −17 to −9 s before the start line), a maximal acceleration
phase (on the middle, from −9 to −2 s) and the ﬁnal phase where the athlete attempts to maintain
maximal effort for the remainder of the 200-m (on the right, from −2 to the end of the effort). Here for
example, the second phase (7 s) during which the power has to be maximized was performed at a
mean cadence (126 rpm) corresponded to 104% of Vopt and a mean power (944 W) corresponded to
84% of Pmax (measured with the cycle ergometer reference method: Lode Excalibut SportTM, in
standing position because this phase is performed in this conﬁguration on the ﬁeld). Note in this
typical example the very high values of pedaling rate in the third chronometric phase (Max = 123%
and mean = 117% of Vopt for this athlete) which could be detrimental for maintaining a high level of
power during this phase. Max corresponds to the peak value measured on 1 s interval
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
27


<!-- Page 34 -->
opportunity to determine reliable F-V and P-V relationships and the associated
force and velocity indexes. An interesting attempt was recently proposed in BMX
(Debraux et al. 2013) again with some limitations in terms of range of velocities
(i.e. lack of points below Vopt this time, due to only one sprint conﬁguration was
used to plot the curve). To this end, 3–5 sprints must be performed in different
conditions (speed and gear ratio to alter the amount of external resistance) in order
to combine a sufﬁcient number of force-velocity data couples and on a large range
of pedaling rates (from 70–80 rpm up to 180–190 rpm). The justiﬁcation is to
ensure that pedaling rates around Vopt are reached during the effort ant that both
ascending and descending parts of the P-V relationship can be ﬁtted with true data.
Moreover, the same practical precautions than in laboratory should be taken and
particularly the duration of the sprint to avoid potential effect of fatigue and then
error in descending portion of the power-velocity relationship.
Overall, both ﬁeld tools and cycle ergometers are generally limited to record data
below almost 50 rpm, at least at this time. We will see in the next chapter that it is
possible with more sophisticated pedal dynamometer to better investigate the
speciﬁcity of the exercises performed at extremely high level of force (compared to
the Fmax index extrapolated from the F-V relationship). Indeed, these efforts are
performed in a very speciﬁc standing position with lateral oscillations leading likely
to adjustment in terms of pedaling technique and coordination.
2.6
Conclusion
Force- and power-velocity relationships allow the reliable assessment of maximal
power capabilities and its two force and velocity components in cycling. Provided that
proper methodology and advices presented in this chapter are used, the different indexes
(Fmax, Vmax, Pmax, Vopt) extracted from these relationships give very useful information
(i) to evaluate the lower limb muscle function, (ii) to monitor the speciﬁc and general
strength training effects and (iii) to interpret and characterize the muscle involvement in
the efforts performed on the ﬁeld in training or competition context. The method on
stationaryergometer is now straightforward and particularlyadapted tothe setting ofthe
individuals and hence remains the reference method to use, whereas portable power-
meters are accessible and will become more and more suitable.
References
Arsac LM, Belli A, Lacour JR (1996) Muscle function during brief maximal exercise: accurate
measurements on a friction-loaded cycle ergometer. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol
74(1–2):100–106
Beelen A, Sargeant AJ (1991) Effect of fatigue on maximal power output at different contraction
velocities in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) 71(6):2332–2337
28
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 35 -->
Beelen A, Sargeant AJ, Wijkhuizen F (1994) Measurement of directional force and power during
human submaximal and maximal isokinetic exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 68
(2):177–181
Bertucci W, Taiar R, Grappe F (2005) Differences between sprint tests under laboratory and actual
cycling conditions. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 45(3):277–283
Bobbert MF, Casius LJ, van Soest AJ (2015) On the relationship between pedal force and crank
angular velocity in sprint cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc. https://doi.org/10.1249/mss.
0000000000000845
Bonnefoy M, Kostka T, Arsac LM, Berthouze SE, Lacour JR (1998) Peak anaerobic power in
elderly men. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 77(1–2):182–188
Buttelli O, Vandewalle H, Peres G (1996) The relationship between maximal power and maximal
torque-velocity using an electronic ergometer. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 73(5):479–483
Caiozzo VJ, Baldwin KM (1997) Determinants of work produced by skeletal muscle: potential
limitations of activation and relaxation. Am J Physiol 273(3 Pt 1):C1049–C1056
Capmal S, Vandewalle H (1997) Torque-velocity relationship during cycle ergometer sprints with
and without toe clips. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 76(4):375–379
Cross MR, Brughelli M, Samozino P, Morin JB (2017) Methods of power-force-velocity proﬁling
during sprint running: a narrative review. Sports Med 47(7):1255–1269. https://doi.org/10.
1007/s40279-016-0653-3
Davies CT, Wemyss-Holden J, Young K (1984) Measurement of short term power output:
comparison between cycling and jumping. Ergonomics 27(3):285–296. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00140138408963490
Debraux P, Manolova AV, Soudain-Pineau M, Hourde C, Bertucci W (2013) Maximal torque and
power pedaling rate relationships for high level BMX riders in ﬁeld tests, vol 1 and 2
di Prampero PE, Cortili G, Mognoni P, Saibene F (1979) Equation of motion of a cyclist. J Appl
Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 47(1):201–206
Dorel S, Bourdin M, Van Praagh E, Lacour JR, Hautier CA (2003) Inﬂuence of two pedalling rate
conditions on mechanical output and physiological responses during all-out intermittent
exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 89(2):157–165. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-002-0764-4
Dorel S, Hautier CA, Rambaud O, Rouffet D, Van Praagh E, Lacour JR, Bourdin M (2005) Torque
and power-velocity relationships in cycling: relevance to track sprint performance in
world-class cyclists. Int J Sports Med 26(9):739–746. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2004-830493
Dorel S, Couturier A, Lacour JR, Vandewalle H, Hautier C, Hug F (2010) Force-velocity
relationship in cycling revisited: beneﬁt of two-dimensional pedal forces analysis. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 42(6):1174–1183. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181c91f35
Dorel S, Guilhem G, Couturier A, Hug F (2012) Adjustment of muscle coordination during an
all-out sprint cycling task. Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(11):2154–2164. https://doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3182625423
Dorel S, Couturier A, Hug F (2014) Maintain a proper muscle coordination is critical to achieve
maximal velocity during a pedaling cyclic task. In: XXth congress of international society of
electromyography and kinesiology, Rome
Driss T, Vandewalle H (2013) The measurement of maximal (anaerobic) power output on a cycle
ergometer: a critical review. Biomed Res Int 2013:589361. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/589361
Driss T, Vandewalle H, Le Chevalier JM, Monod H (2002) Force-velocity relationship on a cycle
ergometer and knee-extensor strength indices. Can J Appl Physiol 27(3):250–262
Elmer SJ, Barratt PR, Korff T, Martin JC (2011) Joint-speciﬁc power production during
submaximal and maximal cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43(10):1940–1947. https://doi.org/10.
1249/MSS.0b013e31821b00c5
Faria EW, Parker DL, Faria IE (2005) The science of cycling: factors affecting performance—Part
2. Sports Med 35(4):313–337
Gardner AS, Martin JC, Martin DT, Barras M, Jenkins DG (2007) Maximal torque- and
power-pedaling rate relationships for elite sprint cyclists in laboratory and ﬁeld tests. Eur J
Appl Physiol 101(3):287–292. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-007-0498-4
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
29


<!-- Page 36 -->
Gardner AS, Martin DT, Jenkins DG, Dyer I, Van Eiden J, Barras M, Martin JC (2009)
Velocity-speciﬁc fatigue: quantifying fatigue during variable velocity cycling. Med Sci Sports
Exerc 41(4):904–911. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e318190c2cc
Hautier CA, Linossier MT, Belli A, Lacour JR, Arsac LM (1996) Optimal velocity for maximal
power production in non-isokinetic cycling is related to muscle ﬁbre type composition. Eur J
Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 74(1–2):114–118
Hill AV (1938) The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle. Proc Royal Soc
London Ser B—Biol Sci 126(843):136–195. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.1938.0050
Hintzy F, Belli A, Grappe F, Rouillon JD (1999) Optimal pedalling velocity characteristics during
maximal and submaximal cycling in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 79(5):426–432
Hug F, Dorel S (2009) Electromyographic analysis of pedaling: a review. J Electromyogr Kinesiol
19(2):182–198. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2007.10.010 (S1050-6411(07)00181-2 [pii])
Hug F, Turpin NA, Couturier A, Dorel S (2011) Consistency of muscle synergies during pedaling
across different mechanical constraints. J Neurophysiol 106(1):91–103. https://doi.org/10.
1152/jn.01096.2010 (jn.01096.2010 [pii])
Jaafar H, Attiogbe E, Rouis M, Vandewalle H, Driss T (2015) Reliability of force-velocity tests in
cycling and cranking exercises in men and women. Biomed Res Int 2015:954780. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2015/954780
Jones PR, Pearson J (1969) Anthropometric determination of leg fat and muscle plus bone
volumes in young male and female adults. J Physiol 204(2):63P–66P
Kautz SA, Hull ML (1993) A theoretical basis for interpreting the force applied to the pedal in
cycling. J Biomech 26(2):155–165
Linossier MT, Dormois D, Fouquet R, Geyssant A, Denis C (1996) Use of the force-velocity test
to determine the optimal braking force for a sprint exercise on a friction-loaded cycle
ergometer. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 74(5):420–427
Martin JC, Brown NA (2009) Joint-speciﬁc power production and fatigue during maximal cycling.
J Biomech 42(4):474–479. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.11.015 (S0021-9290(08)
00601-5 [pii])
Martin JC, Spirduso WW (2001) Determinants of maximal cycling power: crank length, pedaling
rate and pedal speed. Eur J Appl Physiol 84(5):413–418
Martin JC, Wagner BM, Coyle EF (1997) Inertial-load method determines maximal cycling power
in a single exercise bout. Med Sci Sports Exerc 29(11):1505–1512
Martin JC, Milliken DL, Cobb JE, McFadden KL, Coggan AR (1998) Validation of a
mathematical model for road cycling power. J Appl Biomech 14(3):276–291. https://doi.org/
10.1123/jab.14.3.276
Martin JC, Farrar RP, Wagner BM, Spirduso WW (2000) Maximal power across the lifespan.
J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 55(6):M311–M316
Martin JC, Malina RM, Spirduso WW (2002) Effects of crank length on maximal cycling power
and optimal pedaling rate of boys aged 8–11 years. Eur J Appl Physiol 86(3):215–217
Martin JC, Gardner AS, Barras M, Martin DT (2006) Modeling sprint cycling using ﬁeld-derived
parameters and forward integration. Med Sci Sports Exerc 38(3):592–597. https://doi.org/10.
1249/01.mss.0000193560.34022.04
Martin JC, Davidson CJ, Pardyjak ER (2007) Understanding sprint-cycling performance: the
integration of muscle power, resistance, and modeling. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 2(1):5–21
McCartney N, Heigenhauser GJ, Jones NL (1983a) Power output and fatigue of human muscle in
maximal cycling exercise. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 55(1 Pt 1):218–224
McCartney N, Heigenhauser GJ, Sargeant AJ, Jones NL (1983b) A constant-velocity cycle
ergometer for the study of dynamic muscle function. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc
Physiol 55(1 Pt 1):212–217
Menaspa P, Martin DT, Victor J, Abbiss CR (2015a) Maximal sprint power in road cyclists after
variable and nonvariable high-intensity exercise. J Strength Cond Res 29(11):3156–3161.
https://doi.org/10.1519/jsc.0000000000000972
30
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 37 -->
Menaspa P, Quod M, Martin DT, Peiffer JJ, Abbiss CR (2015b) Physical demands of sprinting in
professional road cycling. Int J Sports Med 36(13):1058–1062. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0035-
1554697
Morin JB, Belli A (2004) A simple method for measurement of maximal downstroke power on
friction-loaded cycle ergometer. J Biomech 37(1):141–145
Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A, Grappe F (2002) Force-velovity relationships and sprint running
performances in trained athletes. Sci Sports 17(2):78–85
Neptune RR, Kautz SA (2001) Muscle activation and deactivation dynamics: the governing
properties in fast cyclical human movement performance? Exerc Sport Sci Rev 29(2):76–80
Olds T (2001) Modelling human locomotion: applications to cycling. Sports Med 31(7):497–509
Olds TS, Norton KI, Craig NP (1993) Mathematical model of cycling performance. J Appl Physiol
(1985) 75(2):730–737
Pearson SJ, Cobbold M, Orrell RW, Harridge SD (2006) Power output and muscle myosin heavy
chain composition in young and elderly men. Med Sci Sports Exerc 38(9):1601–1607. https://
doi.org/10.1249/01.mss.0000227638.75983.9d
Power GA, Minozzo FC, Spendiff S, Filion ME, Konokhova Y, Purves-Smith MF, Pion C,
Aubertin-Leheudre M, Morais JA, Herzog W, Hepple RT, Taivassalo T, Rassier DE (2016)
Reduction in single muscle ﬁber rate of force development with aging is not attenuated in world
class older masters athletes. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 310(4):C318–C327. https://doi.org/10.
1152/ajpcell.00289.2015
Rankin JW, Neptune RR (2010) The inﬂuence of seat conﬁguration on maximal average crank
power during pedaling: a simulation study. J Appl Biomech 26(4):493–500
Reiser RF 2nd, Maines JM, Eisenmann JC, Wilkinson JG (2002) Standing and seated Wingate
protocols in human cycling. A comparison of standard parameters. Eur J Appl Physiol
88(1–2):152–157. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-002-0694-1
Samozino P, Horvais N, Hintzy F (2007) Why does power output decrease at high pedaling rates
during sprint cycling? Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(4):680–687. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.
0b013e3180315246
Sargeant AJ (1994) Human power output and muscle fatigue. Int J Sports Med 15(3):116–121.
https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-1021031
Sargeant AJ, Hoinville E, Young A (1981) Maximum leg force and power output during
short-term dynamic exercise. J Appl Physiol 51(5):1175–1182
Tofari PJ, Cormack SJ, Ebert TR, Gardner AS, Kemp JG (2016) Comparison of ergometer- and
track-based testing in junior track-sprint cyclists. Implications for talent identiﬁcation and
development. J Sports Sci 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2016.1243795
Tomas A, Ross EZ, Martin JC (2010) Fatigue during maximal sprint cycling: unique role of
cumulative contraction cycles. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42(7):1364–1369. https://doi.org/10.
1249/MSS.0b013e3181cae2ce
Turpin NA, Costes A, Moretto P, Watier B (2017) Upper limb and trunk muscle activity patterns
during seated and standing cycling. J Sports Sci 35(6):557–564. https://doi.org/10.1080/
02640414.2016.1179777
van Soest O, Casius LJ (2000) Which factors determine the optimal pedaling rate in sprint cycling?
Med Sci Sports Exerc 32(11):1927–1934
Vandewalle H, Peres G, Heller J, Panel J, Monod H (1987) Force-velocity relationship and
maximal power on a cycle ergometer. Correlation with the height of a vertical jump. Eur J Appl
Physiol Occup Physiol 56(6):650–656
Vandewalle H, Pérès G, Heller J, Monod H (1988) Intérêts et limites des relations force-vitesse
chez l’homme. Sci et Motricité 4:38–46
Zatsiorsky VM (2008) Biomechanics of strength and strength training. In: Strength and power in
sport. Blackwell Science Ltd, pp 439–487. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470757215.ch23
2
Maximal Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Characteristics …
31

