# Chapter 3: Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination in Sprint Cycling


<!-- Page 38 -->
Chapter 3
Mechanical Effectiveness
and Coordination: New Insights
into Sprint Cycling Performance
Sylvain Dorel
Abstract The pedaling task remains a multijoint task with biomechanical con-
straints (e.g., circular trajectory of the pedal) requiring speciﬁc coordination of the
lower-limb muscles. This chapter attempts to provide an overview of how aspects
related to pedaling technique and muscle coordination partly account for maximal
cycling power capability (i.e., sprint exercise). Our aim in this chapter is (i) to
deﬁne the typical concepts involved, (ii) discuss the practical information provided
(with some examples) and (iii) highlight the main messages for optimizing coor-
dination and sprint performance. Provided that the dynamometer used is capable of
dissociating the force produced by each leg with sufﬁcient temporal resolution and
measuring the orientation of force, it is possible to analyze the pedal force proﬁle
throughout the cycle and the capacity of the athlete to effectively orientate this
force. Using inverse dynamics (including calculation of both muscular and non-
muscular components) and measuring EMG activity our interpretation can clearly
be taken to a new level by better characterizing the involvement of each muscle
group. Despite their inherent limitations, these data represent useful information
about the force-generating capacity of big muscle groups (extensors and ﬂexors) as
well as about pedaling technique, especially for exercise performed at low and
intermediate pedaling rates around which maximal power output is produced. It is
possible in practice to identify any potential weakness in the contribution of speciﬁc
muscle groups (extensor and ﬂexors of the hip, knee and ankle) and ﬁnally to
characterize muscle coordination and its key role as a limiting factor of maximal
power.
S. Dorel (&)
Faculty of Sport Sciences Laboratory “Movement, Interactions,
Performance” (EA 4334), University of Nantes, Nantes, France
e-mail: Sylvain.Dorel@univ-nantes.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_3
33


<!-- Page 39 -->
3.1
Introduction
As mentioned in the previous chapter, pedaling could be considered intuitive and
hence not really dependent on complex control by the central nervous system. On the
other hand, this remains a multijoint task with biomechanical constraints (e.g., cir-
cular trajectory of the pedal) requiring speciﬁc coordination of the lower-limb
muscles. The torque generated over a full crank revolution is therefore not homo-
geneous and analysis of the torque proﬁle may indirectly give some important
insights into the role of the main functional phases and associated muscle groups.
Additionally, it is important to remember that the effective force (i.e., that acts
perpendicular to the bicycle crank and thus produces a torque driving the pedal
around in its circle) represents only one component of the total force produced at the
shoe–pedal interface. The pedaling technique can then be characterized by the ability
to effectively orientate the total force on the pedal. This technical aspect of pedaling
is often evaluated using an index of mechanical effectiveness (IE), deﬁned as the
ratio of the effective force to the total force exerted at the shoe–pedal interface during
a complete cycle (LaFortune and Cavanagh 1983; Sanderson 1991). It is often
suggested here that substantial differences exist between subjects regarding their
power generation techniques. Among coaches, specialists or scientists many still
believe and propose that this “pedaling effectiveness” would be improved by using
some innovative training “methods.” Actually, there is no experimental evidence of
a clear link between this parameter and endurance-cycling performance (i.e., level of
expertise, training status, muscular efﬁciency or metabolic demand; Bini et al. 2013;
Korff et al. 2007). Nevertheless, when power output increases up to a very high level,
the potential relationship between mechanical effectiveness and performance
becomes patently clear and some recent information is now available regarding the
signiﬁcance of this index during explosive cycling exercise.
Additionally, direct measurement of the electromyographic (EMG) activity of the
main muscles (see, for a review, Hug and Dorel 2009) and estimation of the torque
produced at the level of the three main joints (Hull and Jorge 1985) can provide some
deeper understanding of the involvement and functional role of each muscle
group. Until recently, the literature has been concerned with submaximal exercise,
but in the last decade some signiﬁcant ﬁndings have been reported regarding sprint
cycling. As a whole they offer a better understanding of the force, velocity and power
indexes derived from the force–velocity cycling test. This chapter attempts to provide
an overview of how aspects related to pedaling technique and muscle coordination
also partly account for maximal cycling power capability (i.e., sprint exercise). We
will propose an approach which to our mind provides a deeper understanding of the
neuromechanical construction of sprint cycling by combining three types of analysis:
2D pedal force, joint-speciﬁc power and EMG activity measurements. Our aim in this
chapter is (i) to deﬁne the typical concepts involved, (ii) discuss the practical
34
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 40 -->
information provided (with some examples) and (iii) highlight the main messages
for optimizing coordination and sprint performance.
3.2
Torque Proﬁle and Concept of Mechanical
Effectiveness
3.2.1
Production of Power over the Pedaling Cycle
Interpretation of the force–velocity test considering the different phases.
Compared to submaximal exercise, the increase in mean total force produced during
sprint cycling (i.e., over a complete crank cycle) leads to an increase in pedal force
not only during the downstroke phase but also during the upstroke phase. Then,
whereas a slight negative contribution is commonly observed during this second
phase for submaximal exercise, the torque proﬁle during sprint is characterized by a
positive impulse (Beelen et al. 1994; Dorel et al. 2010). This means that the
contribution of the ﬂexor muscles involved in the pull-up action may largely
increase under sprint conditions. As a consequence, although the force–velocity test
presented in the previous chapter is classically used to assess the muscle function of
the extensor muscles (and particularly the quadriceps), the actual participation of
these muscle groups compared with the ﬂexor muscles has to be fully evaluated.
To investigate the contribution of each functional cycle phase, we focused on the
force produced in different parts of the pedaling cycle during a classical force–
velocity test performed on a speciﬁc cycle ergometer (Lode Excalibur SportTM;
Dorel et al. 2010). Mean values of force and power corresponding to four functional
angular sectors of the pedaling cycle were calculated: sector 1, 330°–30° (top);
sector 2, 30°–150° (downstroke); sector 3, 150°–210° (bottom); and sector 4, 210°–
330° (upstroke), with 0° corresponding to the highest position of the pedal. From a
functional standpoint, sectors 1 and 2 correspond to the sectors around the top dead
center (TDC: ﬂexion-to-extension transition) and the main propulsive downstroke
phases, and sectors 3 and 4 correspond to the sectors around bottom dead center
(BDC:
extension-to-ﬂexion
transition)
and
the
propulsive
upstroke
phases
(Fig. 3.1). The results conﬁrmed that force–velocity and power–velocity charac-
teristics in cycling mainly reﬂect the function of muscles responsible for pushing on
the pedal during the extension phase (sectors 1 + 2, hip and knee extensors).
Moreover, they showed an important positive contribution from the upstroke phase
especially at low and moderate pedaling rates (Fig. 3.1). Indeed, when pedaling at
maximal power (Pmax), almost 19% of the total power on the entire cycle is pro-
duced during the ﬂexion phase of the lower limb (almost corresponding to sectors
3 + 4). Additionally, signiﬁcant relationships also exist between the indexes of
maximal force and power produced in the upstroke phase and those obtained on the
complete revolution. Overall, these ﬁndings clearly indicate that data from all-out
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
35


<!-- Page 41 -->
cycling exercise also reﬂect the muscular capability of ﬂexor muscles involved
during the pedal upstroke (i.e., knee and hip ﬂexors).
Practical implications for interpreting and monitoring the force–velocity
characteristics. In line with the previous paragraph, measurement of the contri-
butions of both the ﬂexion and extension phases appears really pertinent to be
included in cycling force–velocity testing procedures. Moreover, pedaling is an
alternative cyclic task characterized by an antiphase action of both lower limbs,
meaning that when one is pushing on the pedal (i.e., downstroke), the other is
recovering or pulling up on the second pedal (i.e., upstroke). Due to the mechanical
coupling between both cranks at the bottom bracket, the net crank torque results
from these simultaneous actions on the two pedals. Consequently, it should be kept
in mind that it is necessary to measure the torque/force with dissociated sensors on
each crank or pedal to be able to estimate the contribution of each lower limb and
the possible imbalance between both (Fig. 3.2). The opportunity to measure the
mechanical output for each lower limb separately allows not only (i) evaluation of
the global contribution of each leg but also (ii) interpretation of potential asymmetry
by isolating the part of the cycle where this difference occurs. In the typical example
depicted in Fig. 3.2b, we can conclude that during this submaximal exercise the
right leg produces more force than the left and that concerns both the downstroke
and the upstroke phases.
From the practical point of view of training, it is interesting to describe this
information during a classical force–velocity (F–V) test. Measuring the torque with
sensors placed either in both pedals or both cranks the global F–V relationship can
be expanded into two subrelationships which provide additional information on
muscle capabilities. First, by simplifying the cycle to two main phases,
Fig. 3.1 Left Representation of the 2D forces applied on the pedal (sagittal plan), and the four
angular sectors considered to decompose the pedaling cycle. Total force (Ftot) produced at the
shoe–pedal interface ant its two components: the effective force (Feff) acting perpendicularly to the
crank and FI, acting along the crank. Right Relative contribution to the total power output (in %)
produced during each of the four functional sectors in three pedaling conditions of the force–
velocity relationship (below, around and above the optimal pedaling rate: Vopt, respectively).
Adapted from Dorel et al. (2010)
36
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 42 -->
force–velocity relationships on the downstroke and upstroke can be determined to
better identify the force and velocity capabilities of the extensor and the ﬂexor
muscles, respectively. Second, a global force–velocity relationship can be deter-
mined individually for each leg and ultimately expressed in its two components: the
downstroke and upstroke phases. A typical report of F–V testing session on an elite
sprint track cyclist describing these results is presented in Fig. 3.3. In addition to the
global force–velocity indexes (Panel a), we can rapidly observe for this example:
(i) a maximal force produced during the upstroke amounting to 21% of the total
force (Panel b), (ii) global asymmetry with the left leg exhibiting higher force and
velocity capacities resulting in higher power produced by this leg of almost 10%
(Panel c) and ﬁnally (iii) the explanation that this asymmetry mainly results from
the higher force, velocity and hence power produced by this leg in the upstroke
(Panel d), meaning that it is primarily related to the properties of the ﬂexor muscles
such as the psoas and the hamstrings. As a whole, there is a greater likelihood that
this approach would be very useful for monitoring performance in sprint cycling
and orienting a strength training program.
Fig. 3.2 Two theoretical examples of the effective force proﬁles produced on each pedal and the
corresponding net (total) effective force (i.e., crank torque equivalent) during a submaximal
cycling exercise. Note the similarity in the shape and peak values obtained during each stroke for
total effective force proﬁles in both examples, which does not imply that a signiﬁcant imbalance
cannot appear between each lower limb in their relative contribution to the power in the two main
phases of the cycle (downstroke and upstroke)
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
37


<!-- Page 43 -->
38
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 44 -->
3.2.2
Mechanical Effectiveness: The Orientation
of Pedal Force
The concept of mechanical effectiveness in cycling. One characteristic of the
biomechanics of force application during cycling is that the propulsive crank torque
is proportional to the effective force, which represents only one component of the
total force produced at the shoe–pedal interface. Throughout a pedaling cycle, not
only the magnitude but also the orientation of the force vector on the pedal is
altered. Thus, in order to account for this ability to effectively orient the force on the
pedal (i.e., so that more of the resultant force participates in the propulsive action),
the concept of mechanical effectiveness was introduced and an index of mechanical
effectiveness (IE) proposed almost 30 years ago (Ericson and Nisell 1988;
Sanderson 1991). As far as the sagittal plan is concerned, it is deﬁned as the ratio
(expressed from 0 to 1 or in %) between the magnitude of the effective force
component (Feff) produced perpendicularly to the crank and the magnitude of the
resultant total force (Ftot): IE(%) = (Feff  Ftot
−1)  100 (Fig. 3.4). Note that this
index is sometimes called the index of mechanical efﬁciency, which is not really
appropriate because of the risk of confusing muscular efﬁciency corresponding to
the ratio between mechanical output and metabolic demand (energy consumption).
Note that different pedal dynamometers have been described in the literature as
historically restricted to laboratory use (Davis and Hull 1981), but recently some
speciﬁc prototypes (Drouet et al. 2008) or commercial devices (I-Crankset-2,
SensixTM, Poitiers) allow both a research and training application on the ﬁeld.
Brieﬂy, a series of strain gauges and optical encoders to record both the pedal angle
to the crank and the crank to the vertical allow by means of trigonometry to
calculate Ftot as well as its orientation and hence to determine Feff and IE (Fig. 3.4).
Hence, IE has been logically proposed as an indicator of cycling skill (see detailed
review of Bini et al. 2013), which leads us to discuss its signiﬁcance regarding
force–velocity and power–velocity capabilities in the following sections.
Force–velocity
relationship
and
mechanical
effectiveness.
Regarding
explosive sprint cycling, information on the index of mechanical effectiveness has
JFig. 3.3 Typical detailed report of a force–velocity test performed on a cycle ergometer equipped
with strain gauges in both cranks for an elite sprint cyclist. a Classical force–velocity and power–
velocity relationships and the associated force, power and velocity indexes: Vmax, maximal
pedaling rate (rpm); Vopt, optimal pedaling rate (rpm); Fmax, maximal force (N and N kg−1 of body
mass); Pmax, maximal power (W and W kg−1 of body mass); and Pmax PIC, peak power
corresponding to the mean of the three cycles with the highest values. b Relative contribution of
the downstroke (0–180°) and the upstroke (180–360°) represented as two distinct global force–
velocity relationships (ant their Fmax and Vmax) expressed in percentage of the value obtained on
the full cycle. c force–velocity relationships and Fmax, Vmax and Pmax measured on each leg and the
consequence in terms of asymmetry. d Analysis of the contribution of each leg referring to the two
functional phases (expressed as force–velocity relationships also) to better evaluate the potential
imbalance between both legs in terms of pushing action in the downstroke and pulling action in the
upstroke
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
39


<!-- Page 45 -->
been scarce until recently. However, during submaximal exercise, it was demon-
strated that it increases with the level of power output (Bini et al. 2013; Patterson
and Moreno 1990; Rossato et al. 2008) and decreases with increased pedaling rate
(Neptune and Herzog 1999; Sanderson et al. 2000). Based on these ﬁndings, IE
may be of particular interest under sprint conditions and valuable to interpret the
force and power changes associated with the increase in pedaling rate during force–
velocity tests. One key question is whether the force–velocity characteristics also
reﬂect the ability of the muscle to effectively orient the total force on the pedal. In
the study mentioned in the previous section (Dorel et al. 2010), which speciﬁcally
investigated this in a population of active males, we observed three important
insights regarding the role of IE (Fig. 3.5):
Fig. 3.4 a Picture of the instrumented force pedal equipped with the Look Keo platform and a
retention safety strap (VélUS group, Sherbrooke University, Canada). b Exploded view of the
pedal base assembly showing the different components measuring forces and angular displace-
ment. c Representation of the tangential (FT) and normal (FN) components of the total force (Ftot)
in the sagittal plane directly measured by the strain gauges. Associated with the measurement of
pedal angle relative to the crank (b), both the effective force (Feff) and the index of mechanical
effectiveness (IE = (Feff ∙Ftot
−1)  100) can be calculated and expressed as a function of the crank
angle (h measured by a second encoder). Adapted from Drouet et al. (2008); Hug et al. (2008)
40
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 46 -->
• IE values for the complete revolution (between 76 ± 4 and 73 ± 5% from 30 to
50% of Vmax: 70–120 rpm) were very high compared with endurance cycling
conﬁrming the idea that maximization of power output is associated with
optimization of the total force orientation at the pedals.
• The great reduction in IE to 35% observed at high velocities (around 190 rpm)
highlights the difﬁculty of efﬁciently orienting the force on the pedals at these
Fig. 3.5 Power output (a),
total force (b, open circles),
effective force (b, ﬁlled
circles) and index of
effectiveness (c) as a function
of the pedaling rate during a
force–velocity cycling test.
A second-order polynomial
was used for modeling the
power–pedaling, total
force–pedaling and index of
effectiveness–pedaling rate
relationships and linear
regression for effective
force–pedaling rate
relationship. Gray lines
(individual models, with the
mean of individuals R2) and
black lines (mean trend
curves) are shown for
information and clarity
purposes. Power, force and
pedaling rate are normalized
to their maximal value
extracted from the model
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
41


<!-- Page 47 -->
cadences, especially during the upstroke, BDC and TDC phases. Hence, this
decrease of IE could explain, at least partially, the descending portion of the
power–velocity relationship for high pedaling rates.
• In line with these results, the IE–velocity relationship exhibited a high
between-subject variability. Hence, IE appears to be a signiﬁcant explanatory
factor for differences in power production during the upstroke and around the
TDC at low pedaling rates (i.e., below Vopt) and during all phases at higher
cadences.
3.3
Joint-Speciﬁc Power and Interest in Inverse Dynamics
3.3.1
Approach and Principle
From a mechanical standpoint, the primary aim to be successful in sprint cycling is
to produce a maximal torque at the crank level. However, it requires moving the
lower-limb segments in such a way that the foot moves on the circular trajectory of
the pedal. The work produced by the muscles (indirectly reﬂected by the EMG
activity level) is then primarily used to move the segments (the thigh, the shank and
the foot) and is ultimately transformed into mechanical work at the crank level
(Driss and Vandewalle 2013; Hull and Jorge 1985; Kautz et al. 1994). Therefore, it
is important to keep in mind that pedal force can be decomposed into a muscular
component directly related to intersegmental net joint torques and a nonmuscular
component due to gravitational and inertial effects (i.e., linked to change in
mechanical energy of the segments; Fregly and Zajac 1996).
A classical approach to better estimate muscular power is to evaluate the net
muscle torque or power at each joint using the well-known inverse dynamics
approach. This technique entails three steps: (i) choosing a biomechanical model
and the inertial parameters of the segments, (ii) recording the joint/segment kine-
matics and (iii) measuring the external forces applied on the lower limb of the
cyclist (at the shoe–pedal interface). Since the pioneer studies (Gregor et al. 1985;
Hull and Jorge 1985; van Ingen Schenau et al. 1990) important technological and
methodological improvements in data recording and processing have been made,
especially in the last decade, which allow assessing these parameters accurately,
relatively quickly and easily. Modeling includes deﬁnition of the segments and the
location of axes of rotation (joint centers). Classically, the model of the lower limb
in cycling considers four rigid body segments (pelvis, thigh, shank and feet) linked
by three joints (hip, knee and ankle). Because cycling movement is considered to
mainly occur in the sagittal plane, it is reasonable to apply a 2D inverse dynamic
procedure focusing on the efforts of joints around the transverse axis. Finally, the
power produced at each joint is estimated by the dot product of net joint torque and
joint angular velocity.
42
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 48 -->
3.3.2
Information Regarding Force and Power Capabilities
in Cycling
The main knowledge about joint-speciﬁc power distribution during maximal
cycling is now well established and provides a better insight into muscle coordi-
nation (contribution of the main muscle groups), which is not apparent when only
observing overall power/force at the pedal (Barratt et al. 2011; Elmer et al. 2011;
Korff et al. 2009; Martin and Brown 2009; McDaniel et al. 2014). Classically, the
power produced at the hip, knee and ankle is calculated. Ultimately, a last com-
ponent corresponding to the effect of the power transferred across the hip joint by
upper-body muscles can be estimated (by the dot product of the hip joint reaction
force and linear velocity). Total muscular power is then evaluated by adding up all
these power components, which allows observing the difference between the curves
corresponding to pedal power and muscular power in order to appreciate the
inﬂuence of nonmuscular variables (Fig. 3.6). A ﬁrst practical message is that the
power measured at the pedal necessarily represents an overestimation of the mus-
cular power really produced during the downstroke and an underestimation of the
muscular power produced during the upstroke. Indeed, the gravitational effect
causes the weight of the limb to always act downward, providing additional power
to the pedal during extension but consuming power during ﬂexion. Moreover,
depending on both the inertia of the segments and kinematics, this discrepancy may
be also inﬂuenced by both the pedaling rate the anthropometric characteristics of
each individual (Driss and Vandewalle 2013).
Furthermore, the main interest is to plot the proﬁle of each joint-speciﬁc power
in order the estimate the contribution of each action (hip, knee, ankle extension and
ﬂexion) to total muscular power produced and to put forward in which part of the
cycle it occurs. Using this methodology on trained endurance cyclists, Martin and
Brown (2009) and Elmer et al. (2011) demonstrated that maximal cycling power (at
around 120 rpm) is produced mainly by the muscles involved in hip extension and
to a lesser extent by those involved in knee extension, knee ﬂexion and plantar
ﬂexion (Fig. 3.6). Two main items of information should be highlighted: (i) the
main power producers are the hip extensors with more than 40% of the power
produced over the entire cycle, and (ii) the total power produced during the ﬂexion
phase (i.e., upstroke) represents almost 21% of the total power, conﬁrming this
phase as a signiﬁcant contributor (see Sect. 3.2.1). Interestingly, the knee ﬂexion
power produced during the upstroke is almost the same as the knee extension power
produced during the extension (*22%). Note that a small portion of power is also
produced due to power transfer at the hip joint (5–6%), suggesting that the upper
body may play a small role even in the seating position.
Considering the power–velocity relationship in cycling, one main interesting
question is to determine how the pedaling rate inﬂuences the contribution of the
action of each joint in such a way that can explain the ascending and descending
part of the power–velocity curve. In other words, we can wonder whether Pmax and
the corresponding optimal velocity (Vopt) may actually match the situation where all
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
43


<!-- Page 49 -->
the power at each joint is also at its maximal level. In fact, this question is very
complex and further studies are needed to elucidate exactly the force–velocity
condition of each muscle group during sprint cycling. However, it is highly unlikely
that all the muscles would be in optimal condition to produce their maximal power
when pedaling at Vopt (Driss and Vandewalle 2013; van Soest and Casius 2000).
Fig. 3.6 a Mean proﬁles of pedal, muscular and each joint-speciﬁc power over the crank cycle
during the ﬁrst 3 s of isokinetic maximal cycling performed at 120 rpm. The sum of the power
produced at all the joints plus the power transferred across the hip corresponds to total muscular
power (adapted from Martin and Brown 2009). Note that pedal power is signiﬁcantly higher than
muscular power during the downstroke (0–180°) and inversely during the upstroke due to the
change in mechanical energy of the lower limb (i.e., potential and kinetic energies). b Schematic
representation of the relative contribution (in %) of each joint action (ﬂexion and extension at the
hip, knee and ankle) to total muscular power produced to generate maximal pedal power.
Additional power is produced across the hip due to the involvement of upper-body musculature
44
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 50 -->
A recent study in this area (McDaniel et al. 2014) supports this after evaluating
joint-speciﬁc power at the ankle, knee and hip during a maximal force–velocity test
in cycling (i.e., ﬁve isokinetic exercises performed over a range of pedaling rates
from 60 to 180 rpm). The results clearly showed that the contribution of each joint
action to total cycling power is dependent on pedaling rate and that ankle, knee and
hip joint power–pedaling rate relationships are very different both in their amplitude
and shape (Fig. 3.7c). The key ﬁndings summarized in the ﬁgure are as follows:
• as the ankle’s range of motion decreases its angular velocity is almost constant
with the increased pedaling rate from 90 to 180 rpm (Panel A), resulting in a
decrease in plantar ﬂexion power (Panels B and C) but a maintenance of high
torque;
Fig. 3.7 a Mean power produced by each joint action (extension and ﬂexion at the ankle, knee
and hip) in relation to the pedaling rate during ﬁve isokinetic sprint cycling exercises (60–
180 rpm). Black lines: mean trend curves (quadratic regression) are shown for information and
clarity purposes. b Joint angular velocity under the ﬁve pedaling rate conditions. Knee and hip
angular velocity increased with pedaling rate. (*Signiﬁcant linear relationship. a, b, c, d and e
Signiﬁcantly different from 60, 90, 120, 150 and 180 rpm, respectively. #Signiﬁcant difference
from all other pedaling rates.) c Relation between the power produced by individual joint actions
and joint angular velocities during the ﬁve sprints. Mean trend curves (quadratic model) are shown
for information. Adapted from McDaniel et al. (2014)
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
45


<!-- Page 51 -->
• the main power producers, the hip extensors, continue to increase their power
even above 120 rpm (*Vopt of pedal power), reaching a maximal value at 150–
180 rpm, and then signiﬁcantly increases their relative contribution under these
power–velocity conditions;
• the same tendency is observed for knee ﬂexion power leading to a slight
increased contribution at the higher pedaling rate whereas knee extension power
decreases above 120 rpm which explains that its contribution to total power
remains nearly constant.
The discrepancy in power–velocity relationships between the actions of joints is
very useful to understanding how the pedaling rate induces different force–velocity
and power–velocity constraints across the main muscle groups. It is particularly
valuable when using sprint cycling as a muscular training or rehabilitation modality.
Inversely, it is also interesting to adapt the modalities of the local strength training
program (i.e., isolated single-joint exercises) when the goal is to improve cycling
power in a speciﬁc part of the power–velocity relationship. Nevertheless, these
joint-speciﬁc power characteristics necessarily also reﬂect the effect of pedaling rate
on activation dynamics and muscle coordination, which are discussed in the next
section.
3.4
Muscle Activity and Muscle Coordination
Muscle coordination can be deﬁned as the distribution of activations or forces among
individual muscles to produce a given combination of joint moments (Prilutsky
2000) or more generally to perform a given task (Kautz et al. 2000). While the
inverse dynamics approach provides information about this coordination, it is lim-
ited as it does not give a direct measure of muscle force, which would represent the
ultimate factor to understanding the muscle coordination. Indeed, the net torque
estimated at a given joint can result from very different combinations of simulta-
neous extension and ﬂexion torques generated by angonist and antagonist muscles.
EMG activity is interesting here as it can be recorded on a speciﬁc muscle. EMG
signal amplitude is mainly related to neural output from the spinal cord and, thus, to
the number of activated motor units and their discharge rates. So, it is a means to
have a good overview of the involvement of the main lower-limb muscles, espe-
cially how (level of activity) and when (timing of activity) they mostly contribute.
As a lower-extremity multijoint cyclic movement, cycling requires a speciﬁc
muscle coordination (Hug and Dorel 2009). EMG analyses have demonstrated that
most of the lower-limb muscle groups are involved during pedaling, each with their
own function(s) regarding the six basic joint movements: hip extension and ﬂexion,
knee extension and ﬂexion, and ankle plantar ﬂexion and dorsiﬂexion (Fig. 3.8).
The coordination strategy illustrated by the sequence of muscle activations partly
underlies the joint-speciﬁc torque and pedal effective force proﬁles presented
previously. As a consequence, recording EMG activity can provide interesting
46
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 52 -->
information about the involvement of the different muscles and, hence, interpre-
tation of the macroscopic cycling force and power capacities.
3.4.1
The Speciﬁcity of Muscle Coordination in Sprint
Cycling
Both EMG activity level and activation patterns of the different muscles over the
pedaling cycle can be used to describe muscle coordination. While these data are
well documented during submaximal cycling exercises (for a review see Hug and
Dorel 2009), the literature regarding all-out sprint conditions is much poorer.
Conceptually, contrary to endurance cycling during which muscles are involved at a
submaximal level, during sprinting all the agonist muscles need to be very highly
recruited in order to maximize total mechanical output. However, does this mean
that all the muscles are maximally activated and produce a maximal level of force to
produce a maximal pedal force? Studies performed in the last decade showed that it
is not exactly the case and suggest that muscle coordination plays a key role in high
Fig. 3.8 Schematic representation of the main lower-limb muscles involved in pedaling and their
functions. These include the single-joint monofunctional muscles such as the gluteus maximus
(GMax), vastus medialis (VM) and vastus lateralis (VL), psoas iliacus (PI), biceps femoris short
head (BFs), popliteus (Pop), soleus (SOL) and tibialis anterior (TA); as well as two-joint
bifunctional muscles such as the rectus Rectus femoris (RF), semimembranosus (SM),
semitendinosus (ST), biceps femoris long head (BFl), gastrocnemius medialis (GM) and lateralis
(GL). Muscles that are possibly recorded with surface EMG are GMax, TFL, VM, VL, RF, SM,
ST, BFl, GM, GL, SOL and TA
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
47


<!-- Page 53 -->
power production and has some speciﬁcities in sprint cycling (Dorel et al. 2012;
Wakeling et al. 2010; O’Bryan et al. 2014).
Recent studies nicely demonstrated that increases in power during cycling from
very low to high levels are achieved that are not matched by similar increases in
EMG amplitude, whereas they are associated with signiﬁcant changes in timings of
activation (Blake and Wakeling 2015). As regards sprint cycling in particular, our
group investigated changes in the EMG amplitude and the timing of activity during
all-out sprint pedaling by elite sprint cyclists (Dorel et al. 2012). To speciﬁcally
answer the aforementioned questions, comparisons were made with both submaxi-
mal exercises and maximal voluntary contractions (MVCs) performed during
single-joint tasks (Fig. 3.9). Results showed that muscle coordination during all-out
Fig. 3.9 a Mean (±SD) EMG patterns of the 11 lower-limb muscles and crank torque proﬁle
(bottom right panel) for the two lots of endurance cycling (performed at 150 W, Sub150 W in red,
and at the secondary ventilator threshold, SubVT2 in black) and one lot of all-out sprint cycling
(Sprint in blue). The patterns correspond to an average 30 consecutive pedaling cycles (for
Sub150 W and SubVT2) and 6–7 (for Sprint) and are expressed as a function of the crank position
(highest pedal position: TDC = 0°). b Activity level (mean peak value of EMG pattern) of each
muscle under the three conditions, expressed as a percentage of maximal activity recorded during
the MVC procedure (RMSMVC). Only the statistics regarding a signiﬁcant difference between
values measured during Sprint and RMSMVC for each muscle (on the right) are presented.
(#P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001.) See Fig. 3.8 for nomenclature of muscles. Adapted from
Dorel et al. (2012) (n = 15, elite sprint cyclists: 5 women, 10 men) (Colour in online)
48
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 54 -->
sprinting is characterized by a very large increase in EMG activity level for the hip
ﬂexors (a factor of 7–9 from 150 W submaximal condition to the sprint condition)
and the knee ﬂexors and hip extensors (a factor of 5–7), whereas plantar ﬂexors and
knee extensors demonstrate a lower increase (a factor of 2–3). Second, although all
muscles greatly increase their activity during sprint cycling, the activity level failed
to reach a maximal value for some muscles, especially for hamstrings and the gluteus
maximus (i.e., 70–80% of peak EMG activity during MVCs), Finally, an increase in
the duration of activity was reported for almost all of the muscle groups suggesting
that muscle coordination represent an interesting coordination strategy during all-out
sprinting to enhance the work generated by each muscle.
As a whole EMG analysis in sprint cycling gives four important insights or
conﬁrmations regarding the participation of the different muscle groups and the role
of coordination and pedaling technique in maximal power capability:
• the maximal level of activity observed for the quadriceps and triceps surae
suggests that the intrinsic force-generating capacities of these muscles remain
likely one of the most relevant factors in performance during the extension phase;
• in addition, the greater increased activity of hip extensors and knee ﬂexors under
sprint conditions compared with the other muscles conﬁrms the previous
statement (Sects. 3.2 and 3.3), whereby maximal power in cycling also reﬂects
the large contribution of both the most powerful hip extensors in the downstroke
phase and the knee ﬂexors in the upstroke phase;
• associated with the longer period of activation of all the muscles, these changes
in coordination are overall a good explanation of the very high mechanical
effectiveness reported during sprinting;
• however, non-maximal activity level of hamstrings coupled with the important
interindividual variability observed while they were active (and of the tibialis
anterior and gastrocnemii) are in good agreement with the interindividual
variability also observed in the mechanical effectiveness during the same phases
(i.e., BDC and upstroke), suggesting a link between these variables.
3.4.2
Coordination of Monoarticular and Biarticular
Muscles
As aforementioned, the activation pattern of muscles during sprinting should
maximize the pedal effective force, meaning that both the magnitude of the force
vector and its orientation on the pedals should be optimized. It is important to
understand that this is not simply achieved by increasing the activity level of the
different agonist muscle groups. Some main points have to be underscored here to
characterize muscle coordination in cycling and to account for the function of each
muscle group. One important point is the fact that both monoarticular and biar-
ticular muscles are involved, leading to some complexity. By deﬁnition biarticular
muscles have two functions and generate a torque simultaneously on both joints
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
49


<!-- Page 55 -->
they cross. If one function corresponds to an agonist powerful action at one joint
(e.g., hip extension during the downstroke phase for BF and SM, in addition to
GMax), the other function generally corresponds to an antagonist action producing
negative power at the other joint (i.e., a knee ﬂexion for BF and SM at the same
time as knee extension occurs in this phase). A similar observation can be made for
other biarticular muscles: the gastrocnemii and the rectus femoris.
Interestingly, using different simulation and modeling approaches, studies have
demonstrated that these periods of coactivation of biarticular muscles (as antago-
nists of monoarticular muscle) are not detrimental to power production. Indeed, it is
now widely accepted that they serve two main goals: (i) ensuring transfer of
mechanical energy between joints and (ii) participating to effectively orient the
force on the pedal (Fregly and Zajac 1996; Prilutsky 2000; Prilutsky and Gregory
2000; Raasch and Zajac 1999; van Ingen Schenau et al. 1992; Zajac 2002). As an
illustration, for the ﬁrst principle, the coactivation of calf muscles with the
quadriceps during the downstroke phase participates in transferring a part of
extension power at the knee to plantar ﬂexion power at the ankle. For the directional
constraint principle, the co-activation of hamstrings with the quadriceps in the
second part of the downstroke allows limiting the forward component of the
resultant force on the pedal (due to knee extension torque) and then participates in
orienting it more downward and backward (after the 90° position of the pedal),
representing a means of enhancing effective pedal force here (i.e., better effec-
tiveness). Accordingly, it is often considered that monoarticular muscles have an
invariant role as primary force/power producers while biarticular muscles act pri-
marily to transfer energy between the hip, knee and ankle in critical phases of the
cycle and to control the direction of force production at the shoe–pedal endpoint.
Other simulation approaches (Fregly and Zajac 1996; Kautz and Neptune 2002;
Zajac 2002), estimating mechanical energy generation and transfer between the
muscle, limb and crank, also highlighted the important role of the synergistic
actions of agonist muscles crossing different joints, irrespective of whether they are
monoarticular or biarticular muscles (i.e., coactivation of the gluteus and triceps
surae during the downstroke phase). As the hip and knee are responsible for large
energy transfer by accelerating the lower limb during this extension phase, the
activation in synergy of the triceps surae allows this energy to be transferred from
the leg to the crank. That is, much of the energy produced by the knee and hip
extensors is delivered to the crank to produce cycling power. Some authors propose
an interesting simpliﬁed model of muscle coordination during pedaling here, con-
sisting of four functional muscle group controls or synergies (Hug et al. 2010;
Raasch and Zajac 1999): (1) extensor group (hip, knee and ankle monoarticular
extensors), (2) extension to ﬂexion transition group (hamstrings, triceps surae),
(3) ﬂexor group (hip, knee monoarticular ﬂexors) and (4) ﬂexion to extension
transition group (rectus femoris and tibialis anterior). Interestingly, these groups are
almost chronologically activated in the same four functional sectors presented in
Sect. 3.2.1 (sectors 2, 3, 4 and 1, respectively, Fig. 3.1).
50
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 56 -->
3.4.3
Muscle Coordination and Torque–Velocity
Relationship
Based on the maximal force–velocity model of isolated muscle, it can be theoret-
ically assumed that the amplitude of neural excitation arriving at the muscle
(represented by EMG activity) should always be maximal notwithstanding the
force–velocity condition. As for the inverse dynamic, identifying potential changes
in the level and the timing of activity of the main muscles at different points of the
maximal torque–velocity relationship may provide insights into how their contri-
bution may alter and/or potential adjustments of muscle coordination. One study
has already pointed out a modiﬁcation of muscle coordination of thigh muscles at
high pedaling rates during sprint cycling (Samozino et al. 2007). Although they
observed an earlier activation as a result of an increased pedaling rate which was
suggested to compensate for the effect of electromechanical delay, they hypothe-
sized that was not sufﬁcient to maintain an appropriate effective force proﬁle at
pedaling rates beyond Vopt. Hence, this means that the descending part of the
power–velocity relationship may be, at least partially, explained by a difﬁculty to
maintain proper coordination.
To investigate this question more precisely, we analyzed both the level and
timing of muscle activity for 11 muscles during all-out sprinting performed at
different points of the maximal torque–velocity relationship (from 60 to 140% of
Vopt; Dorel et al. 2011). The results indicated that the mean activity level decreased
with increased pedaling rate for knee ﬂexors, plantar ﬂexors and/or hip extensors
(SOL, GM, GL, BF, SM and GMax) while there was no change for knee extensors
(VL, VM) or dorsiﬂexors (TA). There was an increase for hip ﬂexors (RF and
TFL). However, these ﬁndings were not accompanied by alteration of the peak
activity level, suggesting that pedaling rate primarily inﬂuences the timing of
activation of the muscles. Indeed, analysis of the EMG patterns showed the fol-
lowing speciﬁc adjustments (Fig. 3.10):
• some leg and thigh muscles (GL, GM, BF, SM, GMax) are recruited for longer
period at lower pedaling rates than higher, reﬂecting a strategy to enhance
mechanical output during the downstroke for the gluteus maximus, and active
knee ﬂexion torque around the bottom dead center and the upstroke for the
hamstrings and the gastrocnemii;
• earlier activation of all the thigh muscles is found as the pedaling rate increases
conﬁrming previous ﬁndings (Neptune et al. 1997; Samozino et al. 2007) but no
change is shown for the soleus and tibial anterior and slightly later activation is
even observed for the gastrocnemii.
To further explore the limits to neuromuscular adaptations, we carried out an addi-
tional experiment to investigate whether coordination changes even more when
reaching the fastest possible pedaling movement (*Vmax). The same population of elite
sprint cyclists performed an all-out sprint at their optimal pedaling rate (Vopt: *120 to
130 rpm) and another close to their maximal pedaling rate (*Vmax: *210 to 240 rpm).
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
51


<!-- Page 57 -->
Again, we demonstrated the ability to maintain almost the same peak activity levels
under Vmax conditions. Moreover, a large muscle excitation phase advance during
Vmax was observed for all the thigh muscles (−30 to −40° of the crank cycle) but once
again not for the leg muscles. Overall, this conﬁrms that earlier activation seems to be
an interesting adjustment of coordination to address the growing effects of elec-
tromechanical delay at the very high pedaling rate. Nevertheless, opposite changes in
the timing of leg muscles compared with thigh muscles can decrease their period of
coactivation during the downstroke phase. Since the leg muscles transmit a part of the
knee and hip extensors’ power and energy of the segments to the crank thanks to these
periods of coactivation (Neptune and Kautz 2001; O’Bryan et al. 2014; Raasch and
Zajac 1999; Zajac 2002), this ﬁnding might be interpreted as a limiting factor for Vmax.
Interestingly, the extreme decrease of the index of effectiveness (IE = Feff/Ftot) from
66.2 ± 10% at Vopt to 11 ± 4.8% at Vmax partly reﬂects this difﬁculty at extreme
velocities to maintain (i) proper muscle coordination and hence (ii) a substantial
effective force in all parts of the crank cycle even though the important total force is
still applied on the pedals (especially around BDC).
Fig. 3.10 Mean RMS EMG envelopes (averaged over four to six consecutive cycles) for 11
lower-limb muscles during cycling sprints performed at three extreme pedaling rates: low (60%
Vopt * 75 rpm), optimal (100%Vopt * 130 rpm) and high (140%Vopt * 180 rpm). For ease of
comparison the pattern of each muscle is expressed as a percentage of the peak activity recorded
under Vopt conditions (peakRMS100%Vopt). See Fig. 3.8 for nomenclature of muscles (n = 17, elite
sprint cyclists: 6 women, 11 men)
52
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 58 -->
In fact, the cyclical nature of movement during pedaling imposes a crucial
constraint on the control of muscle coordination. Indeed, the higher the pedaling
rate, the lower the time for activating and deactivating the muscles. This activation–
deactivation dynamics becomes an issue at extreme pedaling rates because these
processes are not instantaneous. As the relative sector during which power can be
produced is reduced, it is now well acknowledged that this frequency constraint is
one of the principal factors in the power decrease for pedaling rates beyond Vopt
(Martin 2007; Neptune and Kautz 2001; van Soest and Casius 2000).
3.5
Practical Implications and Perspectives for Testing
and Performance
3.5.1
Pedaling Effectiveness, Muscle Coordination
and Performance: What’s the Link?
A key challenge is to express the inﬂuence the distribution of force throughout the
pedaling cycle, the inﬂuence mechanical effectiveness, and the inﬂuence muscle
coordination have on the global pedaling power capability. This is quite complex
but some recent outcomes on the ﬁeld suggest that coordination and technical
aspects should account for a signiﬁcant part of maximal cycling performance.
The complex case of submaximal cycling. During endurance cycling, although
researchers and coaches commonly suggest that substantial differences exist
between subjects regarding their power generation techniques, it appears that, for a
given intensity–pedaling rate combination, the effective force (or torque) as well as
IE proﬁle as a function of the crank angle are relatively stereotypical (Sanderson
et al. 2000; van Ingen Schenau et al. 1990) and with low interindividual variability
even between novices and experts (Hug et al. 2008; Mornieux et al. 2008;
Sanderson 1991). At the same time, due to the concept of redundancy (Bernstein
1967), EMG activity of the lower-limb muscles shows some between-subject
variability, especially for the muscles involved in the critical phases of the cycle
(TDC and upstroke phase) and those that have two functions (i.e., biarticular
muscles; Hug et al. 2008). From the motor control point of view, muscle coordi-
nation is suggested to depend on different cost functions such as effort (e.g.,
metabolic demand, fatigue), neural activity and/or error variability (Prilutsky 2000).
As a consequence, during submaximal cycling, minimization of these cost functions
is very complex: (i) no single factor can be considered as the governing mechanism
in muscle coordination (Kautz et al. 2000), (ii) a trade-off between these cost
functions may exist and interactions with the biomechanical constraints of the task
may occur (Brochner Nielsen et al. 2016) and (iii) a part of the interindividual
variability observed could indicate that many good-enough solutions are available
for the central nervous system to select (de Rugy et al. 2012). As a consequence, it
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
53


<!-- Page 59 -->
remains very difﬁcult though attractive to express the exact link between muscle
coordination, torque/effectiveness proﬁles and in ﬁne cycling performance during
submaximal cycling. In other words, it is reasonable for an expert to advocate a
speciﬁc but slightly different coordination strategy than another (expert or
non-expert), associated with some subtle differences in the application of pedal
force while cycling, but as yet there is practically no means of identifying clearly
whether this coordination strategy (and associated pedaling technique) is better than
another or whether it may be optimized. However, this does not mean that coaches
and athletes should have no interest in analyzing pedaling technique and coordi-
nation during this type of exercise. What matters is to isolate some factors of
optimization and to monitor whether a potential change in pedaling technique
would be responsible for improving this factor (e.g., (i) a signiﬁcant increase in
muscular efﬁciency at a given level of power, (ii) lower or delayed fatigue at a given
power allowing maintaining the task for a longer period; (iii) a reduction of a great
bilateral imbalance to limit the risk of musculoskeletal injuries, etc.).
Valuable inputs for sprint cycling performance. During sprint cycling, as the
effort is maximal most of the cost functions previously mentioned may be
insigniﬁcant, particularly if the effort is short lived and performed in the absence of
fatigue. Interestingly, this means the motor control “challenge” can be reduced to
simply maximizing total pedal power. The question here is whether the coordina-
tion strategy and pedaling technique are related to improvement of the overall
mechanical output, independently of the intrinsic mechanical properties of muscles.
The ﬁrst evidence of this is now emerging thanks to EMG and/or pedal force
measurements in elite athletes and under ﬁeld conditions.
One issue when investigating this question is that commercial portable power-
meter systems (cited in the previous chapter) do not currently allow the measure-
ment of total pedal force and, hence, neither the index of effectiveness nor the
contribution of each leg in net mechanical output. In this context, our group in
collaboration with the VélUS Group from the Laboratory of Mechanical
Engineering at Sherbrooke University in Canada used speciﬁc instrumented pedals
to quantify for the ﬁrst time 2D pedal forces during sprint cycling performed under
ecological conditions (on the track). Some preliminary results have been reported in
the literature (Dorel et al. 2008, 2015; Drouet et al. 2008). The purpose of this work
was to investigate the possible relationship between maximal force and mechanical
effectiveness, and to analyze the potential link with chronometric performance.
Fifteen world-class track sprint cyclists (11 men and 4 women) performed a 125 m
all-out exercise on the track (without initial velocity- from a standing position).
Mechanical data from instrumented pedals (i.e., forces applied on the pedals, and
pedal and crank angular positions) allowed the effective force (Feff) and the index of
effectiveness (IE) to be calculated. A typical record is depicted in Fig. 3.11. During
this exercise, we demonstrated that performance over the ﬁrst 50 m was signiﬁ-
cantly related to effective force relative to body mass produced at the beginning of
the effort. That is, there is a signiﬁcant relationship between the 50-m time and
maximal effective force produced during the ﬁrst cycle (Fmax) in Nkg−1;
54
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 60 -->
P < 0.001, R2 = 0.661). Regarding the biomechanics of force application, two main
results were observed. First, the positive contribution of the upstroke phase
amounted to 18.9 ± 2.1% (range: 14.9–21.3) of the force produced over the entire
cycle and was signiﬁcantly related to Fmax (P < 0.001, R2 = 0.686) and to 50-m
performance (P < 0.001, R2 = 0.782). Second, the values of IE during this ﬁrst
cycle are extremely high (87.0 ± 1.6%; range: 83.9–89.2) and, despite a moderate
interindividual variability, a signiﬁcant relationship was obtained between IE and
Fmax (P < 0.001, R2 = 0.642) and to a lower extent between IE and 50-m perfor-
mance (P < 0.05, R2 = 0.348). These ﬁndings again conﬁrm the role played by the
ﬂexion phase in producing high force (Dorel et al. 2010; Martin and Brown 2009).
They provided the ﬁrst scientiﬁc evidence that IE, the ability to effectively orient
the pedal force throughout the entire crank cycle (especially during the transition
and upstroke phases) is an important parameter affecting maximal crank torque and,
hence, could be considered an interesting factor in 50-m performance on the ﬁeld,
and in sprint cycling as a whole.
Although EMG activity was not recorded during this experiment, we can rea-
sonably argue that a large part of the variability in pedaling effectiveness observed
between the athletes may result from signiﬁcant differences in muscle coordination.
Indeed, even in the expert population tested on stationary ergometers in a previous
study (Dorel et al. 2012), we already observed signiﬁcant between-subject
Fig. 3.11 Typical evolution of total and effective forces on the left pedal (top panel) and the
pedaling rate and total power output (i.e., sum of both pedals, bottom panel) during a speciﬁc
125-m all-out effort from a standing start performed on the track by a world-class sprinter. The
rectangle made up of dashed lines represents the ﬁrst stroke from a starting crank position of
almost 60–65° up to 180° (corresponding to the downstroke) for the left pedal and the concomitant
upstroke of the right pedal (not presented here)
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
55


<!-- Page 61 -->
variability in both the level and the duration of EMG activity, especially for the
biarticular muscles involved during the extension–ﬂexion transition (hamstring,
gastrocnemii) and also those acting during the upstroke. Moreover, we can assume
that the potential difference in coordination between the athletes is certainly even
more pronounced under speciﬁc track standing start conditions for which the ability
to activate these muscles as high a rate as possible for as long as possible during the
upstroke phase (i.e., to pull up the pedal more effectively) should be a key factor of
performance.
At the same time, the difference in force-generating capacities necessarily
inﬂuences the amount of force produced by these muscles and then may affect
mechanical effectiveness and total pedal effective force. Nevertheless, the link
between the amplitude of pedal effective force and (i) the cyclist’s ability to orient
the pedal force (represented by IE), (ii) muscle coordination and ﬁnally (iii) the
intrinsic mechanical properties of all the activated muscles remains very complex
and the relative contribution of each component to the overall performance is not
fully established. In a previous study (Dorel et al. 2012), the additional MVC
procedure performed on hip, knee and ankle joints in both ﬂexion and extension
came up with some preliminary insights. Indeed, we observed a signiﬁcant rela-
tionship between crank torque (in Nmkg−1) produced during a sprint performed at
80% of Vopt and the sum of the six maximal isometric torques (in Nmkg−1)
performed on a single-joint ergometer (ContrexTM, P < 0.01, R2 = 0.458).
Interestingly, relationships were also obtained regarding more speciﬁc phases and
muscle groups; for instance, between the torque produced during the upstroke phase
and the sum of the three ﬂexor maximal torques (P < 0.01, R2 = 0.504). So, even in
an elite population of sprint cyclists, force-generating capacity remains a key factor
of pedal force and, hence, maximal power capability. On the other hand, the values
of the coefﬁcient of determination emphasize that almost 50% of variance in force
during cycling is not related to intrinsic muscle properties. Although this link would
be higher using a more speciﬁc procedure to test maximal muscle force (i.e.,
dynamic contraction with better speciﬁcity in terms of velocity and change in
muscle length), this clearly supports muscle coordination as the other main can-
didate explaining much of the variance in maximal pedal force/power.
On this point, the analysis of individual results can already give us some
interesting information and conﬁrmation. For example, they demonstrated that the
athlete with lower ability to generate pedal force in upstroke phase during sprint
cycling (*12% of total force over the full cycle) was (i) among the three athletes
with the lowest torque-generating capacities of the hip, knee and ankle ﬂexors, but
also (ii) one who exhibited some “weakness” in the muscle coordination such as
lower (for hamstring) or absence (for gastrocnemii) of activity at the beginning of
the upstroke phase. As a whole, further studies are now necessary to determine
more precisely the contribution not only of the mechanical properties of each
muscle group but also to elucidate the general rules governing the optimization of
muscle coordination during sprint cycling.
56
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 62 -->
3.5.2
Outcomes Regarding the Meaning of Force–Velocity
and Power–Velocity Relationships in Cycling
and Perspectives for Testing and Training
Overall, the different sections of this chapter have described the main aspects of the
neuromechanics of multijoint sprint cycling. They provide interesting new insights
into interpretation of the macroscopic force–velocity and power–velocity models
detailed in Chap. 2, which makes it possible to propose new practical ways of
improving the different qualities (i.e., Fmax, Pmax and Vmax).
Cycling Fmax and Pmax. The maximal power capability (Pmax) is strongly cor-
related with the maximal theoretical effective force (Fmax, see Sect. 2.3.2). First, in
light of the above, this quality is largely dependent on the force-generating capacity
of the lower-limb muscles and more precisely we can highlight the speciﬁc roles of:
• The main monoarticular muscles involved during the extension phase because
they are the main power producers: the hip extensors which contribute heavily
and the quadriceps which are maximally activated during the most important
powerful extension phase. The goal of improving neuromuscular capacities and
volume by speciﬁc strength-training programs remains of major importance for
both.
• The plantar ﬂexors, which are mostly activated during the extension phase,
directly produce a nonnegligible part of total muscle power at the ankle (*15%)
and, more importantly, also ensure energy transfer between joints. These
muscles have to be very strong to be able to transfer the heavy work generated
by the hip and knee extensors at the shoe–pedal interface and to avoid being the
“weakest link of the chain.”
• All the ﬂexor muscles involved during the upstroke phase, the mechanical
output of which can reach up to 25% of total output. Interesting opportunities to
enhance sprint performance exist by optimizing the muscular capacity of these
muscles (especially the knee ﬂexors, hamstrings and to a lower extent the hip
ﬂexors and psoas iliacus by means of strength-training programs).
Second, it is clear that intermuscular coordination is a key factor in limiting
global power output and explaining differences that are not related to the maximum
power from any one muscle itself. On this point we can state that:
• All the monoarticular muscles involved have to be recruited at the highest level
possible to enhance total muscular power and its transfer to the pedal.
• The skill to effectively orient the pedal force (expressed by IE) especially in
critical parts of the cycle (BDC and TDC) can help enhance effective pedal force
in sprint cycling.
• Pedaling effectiveness is associated with the ability to highly recruit the muscles
responsible for the extension–ﬂexion transition (gastrocnemii and hamstrings),
ﬂexion (hamstrings and psoas iliacus) and the ﬂexion–extension transition
(rectus femoris, psoas iliacus and tibialis anterior).
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
57


<!-- Page 63 -->
• Despite its inherent limitations, IE is a very useful index for sprints performed at
low cadence and high level of force (from 0 rpm to Vopt) and, hence, will
become a very interesting tool to monitor the progress in pedaling technique
made by an athlete and the potential beneﬁts on its force and power capabilities.
• The power generation technique and muscle coordination should be optimized
using speciﬁc methods such as online or postsession visual feedback of force
production or new training devices (e.g., independent cranks that constrain the
cyclist to activate targeted muscles; Hug et al. 2013). There is no doubt that new
technologies and portable systems to reliably measure the orientation of pedal
force will emerge in the near future and may have the potential to assist athletes
and coaches in training. Such devices would provide promising perspectives to
improve mechanical effectiveness and, hence, performance, at least for sprint
cycling.
Cycling Vopt or Vmax. A high value of these indexes represent the capacity to
maintain a high level of power even at high pedaling rates. They have been
demonstrated to be related, at least partly, to ﬁber-type distribution (see Sect. 2.3.2)
and, speciﬁcally, the percentage of fast-twitch muscle ﬁbers in the quadriceps
muscle (Hautier et al. 1996; McCartney et al. 1983). Based on the additional
information described here we can propose further explanations to interpret these
indexes and the shape of the power–velocity relationship:
• Although the peak activity level of the different muscles is not dramatically
altered, EMG activity patterns are clearly modiﬁed for cadences higher than Vopt
with different changes in timing of activation for thigh and leg muscles.
• While the pedaling rate is often considered a simple variable reﬂecting velocity
capability, it is important to keep in mind the cyclic characteristic of the task.
Consequently, the aforementioned adjustments in muscle coordination are lar-
gely governed by the excitation–relaxation kinetics of the muscles involved.
This confounding factor (called activation dynamics) necessarily limits the
capacity of the neuromuscular system to reach pedaling rates higher than
300 rpm in humans. Then, some of the challenge here may be reﬂected in the
Vmax or Vopt index.
• As pedaling rate increases, the non-muscular component due to variations in leg
mechanical energy within one revolution also increases (especially, kinetic
energy; Capmal and Vandewalle 2010; Driss and Vandewalle 2013). This
necessarily results in a higher contribution of non-muscle forces to pedal
effective force and an explanation of the alteration of its proﬁle over the com-
plete cycle (e.g., higher torque at the end of the downstroke and very low torque
during the upstroke). One practical consequence is that IE at a high pedaling rate
remains difﬁcult to interpret and should be carried out with care regarding the
optimization of coordination and, hence, performance.
58
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 64 -->
• Finally, all these factors lead to the fact that the global force–velocity rela-
tionship in cycling cannot be considered simply as a perfect picture of
force-velocity caracteristics of each muscle. Indeed, ankle joint velocity does not
increase above Vopt and the associated muscles (especially, the biarticular gas-
trocnemii) can be fully recruited without increasing their shortening velocity
(i.e., quasiisometric contraction). At the same time, the power produced by other
muscles like the hip extensors continues to increase for pedaling rates *150 to
180 rpm (i.e., much higher than Vopt), while others seem to be in better
agreement with the decreased power observed in the global cycling power–
velocity relationship (e.g., knee extensors).
As a whole, we can conclude that Vopt or Vmax extracted from this relationship
and the shape of the power–velocity curve result from the complex interaction
between the (i) force–velocity properties of the different muscles, (ii) adjustments in
the muscle coordination of these muscles to attempt to maintain the highest
mechanical output despite the increase in pedaling rate (by optimizing the pedal
force orientation), and ﬁnally (iii) growing inﬂuence of two fundamental issues with
increased pedaling rate: activation dynamics and increased variation in segmental
energy. Even though it is of great interest from the motor control point of view, the
possibility to optimize these neuromuscular capabilities remains to be deeply
explored before being able to investigate the potential effect of speciﬁc training (see
Sect. 2.3.2 and the paragraph “What about the improvement possibilities by
training?” in Chap. 2).
3.6
Conclusion
Besides assessment of the global force–velocity and power–velocity relationships in
cycling (and associated Fmax, Vmax and Pmax) presented in Chap. 2, here it was
described whether these qualities can be examined in more detail by (i) measuring
mechanical output at the pedal more precisely, (ii) estimating the power produced at
each joint and (iii) determining the level and timing of activity of the different
muscles involved (i.e., both reﬂecting intermuscular coordination). Depending on
the accessibility of tools and level of understanding targeted, each approach can
give very useful outcomes with practical implications for training and testing in
explosive cycling performance. Provided that the dynamometer is capable of dis-
sociating the force produced by each leg with sufﬁcient temporal resolution, it is
possible to analyze the pedal force proﬁle throughout the cycle. If the dynamometer
allows the orientation of force to be measured, it will add interesting information
regarding the capacity of the athlete to effectively orient the total pedal force (i.e.,
the index of effectiveness). Despite their inherent limitations, these data greatly help
in understanding the force-generating capacity of big muscle groups (extensors and
ﬂexors) as well as pedaling technique, especially for exercise performed at low and
intermediate pedaling rates (below and around Vopt). Using inverse dynamics
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
59


<!-- Page 65 -->
(including calculation of both muscular and nonmuscular components) and mea-
suring EMG activity clearly take our interpretation to a new level by better char-
acterizing the involvement of each muscle group. It is in practice possible to
identify potential weaknesses in the contribution of speciﬁc muscle groups (ex-
tensor and ﬂexors of the hip, knee and ankle) and to characterize muscle coordi-
nation and its key role as a limiting factor of maximal power. As a whole, the
question of optimizing muscular capacities (i.e., intrinsic mechanical properties) as
well as muscle coordination by training procedures still remains a challenge for the
future. For now, some of useful data presented here remain not readily available for
all coaches and athletes. However, given the speed of technological progress and
market developments, it is important for sport scientists, coaches and strength
trainers interested in cycling to take ownership of these questions now. Ultimate
objective is to be ready and able to use the data provided by these devices in a near
future with clear objectives in terms of performance improvement.
References
Barratt PR, Korff T, Elmer SJ, Martin JC (2011) The effect of crank length on joint-speciﬁc power
during maximal cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43:1689–1697. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.
0b013e3182125e96
Beelen A, Sargeant AJ, Wijkhuizen F (1994) Measurement of directional force and power during
human submaximal and maximal isokinetic exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 68
(2):177–181
Bernstein N (1967) Coordination and regulation of movements. Pergamon, Oxford
Bini RR, Hume PA, Croft J, Kilding AE (2013) Pedal force effectiveness in cycling: a review of
constraints and training effects. 2(1)
Blake OM, Wakeling JM (2015) Muscle coordination limits efﬁciency and power output of human
limb movement under a wide range of mechanical demands. J Neurophysiol 114(6):
3283–3295. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00765.2015
Brochner Nielsen NP, Hug F, Guével A, Fohanno V, Lardy J, Dorel S (2016) Motor adaptations to
unilateral quadriceps fatigue during a bilateral pedaling task. Scand J Med Sci Sports. https://
doi.org/10.1111/sms.12811
Capmal S, Vandewalle H (2010) Interpretation of crank torque during an all-out cycling exercise at
high pedal rate. Sports Eng 13(1):31–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12283-010-0051-2
Davis RR, Hull ML (1981) Measurement of pedal loading in bicycling: II. Analysis and results.
J Biomech 14(12):857–872
de Rugy A, Loeb GE, Carroll TJ (2012) Muscle coordination is habitual rather than optimal.
J Neurosci 32(21):7384–7391. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.5792-11.2012
Dorel S, Boucher M, Fohanno V, Rao G (2015) Neuromechanics of cycling: opportunities for
optimizing performance. In: Conference proceedings archive (33 international conference of
biomechanics in sports), pp 1368–1373
Dorel S, Couturier A, Lacour JR, Vandewalle H, Hautier C, Hug F (2010) Force-velocity
relationship in cycling revisited: beneﬁt of two-dimensional pedal forces analysis. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 42(6):1174–1183. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181c91f35
Dorel S, Drouet JM, Hug F, Lepretre PM, Champoux Y (2008) New instrumented pedals to
quantify 2D forces at the shoe-pedal interface in ecological conditions: preliminary study in
elite track cyclists. Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Eng 11(S1):89–90. https://doi.org/10.
1080/10255840802297275
60
S. Dorel


<!-- Page 66 -->
Dorel S, Guilhem G, Couturier A, Hug F (2012) Adjustment of muscle coordination during an
all-out sprint cycling task. Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(11):2154–2164. https://doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3182625423
Dorel S, Hug F, Couturier A, Guilhem G (2011) Are EMG patterns and activity levels modiﬁed at
different points of the cycling torque-velocity relationship? In: XXIII congress of the
international society of biomechanics, Brussels
Driss T, Vandewalle H (2013) The measurement of maximal (anaerobic) power output on a cycle
ergometer: a critical review. Biomed Res Int 2013:589361. https://doi.org/10.1155/2013/
589361
Drouet JM, Champoux Y, Dorel S (2008) Development of multi-platform instrumented force
pedals for track cycling. In: Estivalet M, Brisson P (eds) The Engineering of Sport 7, vol 1.
Springer, Paris, pp 263–271
Elmer SJ, Barratt PR, Korff T, Martin JC (2011) Joint-speciﬁc power production during
submaximal and maximal cycling. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43(10):1940–1947. https://doi.org/10.
1249/MSS.0b013e31821b00c5
Ericson MO, Nisell R (1988) Efﬁciency of pedal forces during ergometer cycling. Int J Sports Med
9(2):118–122. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-1024991
Fregly BJ, Zajac FE (1996) A state-space analysis of mechanical energy generation, absorption,
and transfer during pedaling. J Biomech 29(1):81–90
Gregor RJ, Cavanagh PR, LaFortune M (1985) Knee ﬂexor moments during propulsion in cycling
—a creative solution to Lombard’s Paradox. J Biomech 18(5):307–316
Hautier CA, Linossier MT, Belli A, Lacour JR, Arsac LM (1996) Optimal velocity for maximal
power production in non-isokinetic cycling is related to muscle ﬁbre type composition. Eur J
Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 74(1–2):114–118
Hug F, Boumier F, Dorel S (2013) Altered muscle coordination when pedaling with independent
cranks. Front Physiol 4:232. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2013.00232
Hug F, Dorel S (2009) Electromyographic analysis of pedaling: a review. J Electromyogr Kinesiol
19
(2):182–198.
doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jelekin.2007.10.010 [pii]
S1050-6411(07)
00181-2
Hug F, Drouet JM, Champoux Y, Couturier A, Dorel S (2008) Interindividual variability of
electromyographic patterns and pedal force proﬁles in trained cyclists. Eur J Appl Physiol 104
(4):667–678. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-008-0810-y
Hug F, Turpin NA, Guével A, Dorel S (2010) Is interindividual variability of EMG patterns in
trained cyclists related to different muscle synergies? J Appl Physiol 108(6):1727–1736.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01305.2009 01305.2009 [pii]
Hull ML, Jorge M (1985) A method for biomechanical analysis of bicycle pedalling. J Biomech 18
(9):631–644
Kautz SA, Hull ML, Neptune RR (1994) A comparison of muscular mechanical energy
expenditure and internal work in cycling. J Biomech 27(12):1459–1467
Kautz SA, Neptune RR (2002) Biomechanical determinants of pedaling energetics: internal and
external work are not independent. Exerc Sport Sci Rev 30(4):159–165
Kautz SA, Neptune RR, Zajac FE (2000) General coordination principles elucidated by forward
dynamics: minimum fatigue does not explain muscle excitation in dynamic tasks. Motor
Control 4(1):75–80; discussion 97-116
Korff T, Hunter EL, Martin JC (2009) Muscular and non-muscular contributions to maximum
power cycling in children and adults: implications for developmental motor control. J Exp Biol
212(Pt 5):599–603
Korff T, Romer LM, Mayhew I, Martin JC (2007) Effect of pedaling technique on mechanical
effectiveness and efﬁciency in cyclists. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(6):991–995. https://doi.org/
10.1249/mss.0b013e318043a235
LaFortune M, Cavanagh PR (1983) Effectiveness and efﬁciency during bicycle riding. In:
Matsui H, Kobayashi K (eds) Biomechanics VIIB: international series on biomechanics 4B.
Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL, pp 928–936
3
Mechanical Effectiveness and Coordination: New Insights …
61


<!-- Page 67 -->
Martin JC (2007) Muscle power: the interaction of cycle frequency and shortening velocity. Exerc
Sport Sci Rev 35(2):74–81. https://doi.org/10.1097/jes.0b013e31803eb0a0
Martin JC, Brown NA (2009) Joint-speciﬁc power production and fatigue during maximal cycling.
J Biomech 42(4):474–479. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2008.11.015 [pii] S0021-
9290(08)00601-5
McCartney N, Heigenhauser GJ, Jones NL (1983) Power output and fatigue of human muscle in
maximal cycling exercise. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 55(1 Pt 1):218–224
McDaniel J, Behjani NS, Elmer SJ, Brown NA, Martin JC (2014) Joint-speciﬁc power-pedaling
rate relationships during maximal cycling. J Appl Biomech. https://doi.org/10.1123/jab.2013-
0246
Mornieux G, Stapelfeldt B, Gollhofer A, Belli A (2008) Effects of pedal type and pull-up action
during cycling. Int J Sports Med 29(10):817–822
Neptune RR, Herzog W (1999) The association between negative muscle work and pedaling rate.
J Biomech 32(10):1021–1026
Neptune RR, Kautz SA (2001) Muscle activation and deactivation dynamics: the governing
properties in fast cyclical human movement performance? Exerc Sport Sci Rev 29(2):76–80
Neptune RR, Kautz SA, Hull ML (1997) The effect of pedaling rate on coordination in cycling.
J Biomech 30(10):1051–1058
O’Bryan SJ, Brown NA, Billaut F, Rouffet DM (2014) Changes in muscle coordination and power
output during sprint cycling. Neurosci Lett 576:11–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2014.
05.023
Patterson RP, Moreno MI (1990) Bicycle pedalling forces as a function of pedalling rate and
power output. Med Sci Sports Exerc 22(4):512–516
Prilutsky BI (2000) Coordination of two- and one-joint muscles: functional consequences and
implications for motor control. Mot Control 4(1):1–44
Prilutsky BI, Gregory RJ (2000) Analysis of muscle coordination strategies in cycling. IEEE Trans
Rehabil Eng 8(3):362–370
Raasch CC, Zajac FE (1999) Locomotor strategy for pedaling: muscle groups and biomechanical
functions. J Neurophysiol 82(2):515–525
Rossato M, Bini RR, Carpes FP, Diefenthaeler F, Moro AR (2008) Cadence and workload effects
on pedaling technique of well-trained cyclists. Int J Sports Med 29(9):746–752
Samozino P, Horvais N, Hintzy F (2007) Why does power output decrease at high pedaling rates
during sprint cycling? Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(4):680–687. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.
0b013e3180315246
Sanderson DJ (1991) The inﬂuence of cadence and power output on the biomechanics of force
application during steady-rate cycling in competitive and recreational cyclists. J Sports Sci 9
(2):191–203
Sanderson DJ, Hennig EM, Black AH (2000) The inﬂuence of cadence and power output on force
application and in-shoe pressure distribution during cycling by competitive and recreational
cyclists. J Sports Sci 18(3):173–181
van Ingen Schenau GJ, Boots PJ, de Groot G, Snackers RJ, van Woensel WW (1992) The
constrained control offorce and position in multi-joint movements. Neuroscience 46(1):197–207
van Ingen Schenau GJ, van Woensel WW, Boots PJ, Snackers RW, de Groot G (1990)
Determination and interpretation of mechanical power in human movement: application to
ergometer cycling. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 61(1–2):11–19
van Soest O, Casius LJ (2000) Which factors determine the optimal pedaling rate in sprint cycling?
Med Sci Sports Exerc 32(11):1927–1934
Wakeling JM, Blake OM, Chan HK (2010) Muscle coordination is key to the power output and
mechanical efﬁciency of limb movements. J Exp Biol 213(3):487–492
Zajac FE (2002) Understanding muscle coordination of the human leg with dynamical simulations.
J Biomech 35(8):1011–1018
62
S. Dorel

