# Chapter 4: A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity and Power During Jumping


<!-- Page 69 -->
Chapter 4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower
Limb Force, Velocity and Power
Capabilities During Jumping
Pierre Samozino
Abstract Lower limb ballistic movement performance (jump, sprint start, change
of direction) is considered to be a key factor in many sport activities and depends
directly on the mechanical capabilities of the neuromuscular system. This chapter
presents the force-velocity (F-v) and power-velocity (P-v) relationships, and their
associated variables of interest, as an interesting tool to evaluate the different lower
limb muscle mechanical capabilities during ballistic push-off: maximal power and
F-v proﬁle. In this chapter, we will present the different laboratory and ﬁeld
methods to directly or indirectly assess these muscle properties, as well as their
respective limits. We will also present an accurate and reliable simple ﬁeld method
to determine these muscle capabilities with a precision similar to that obtained with
speciﬁc laboratory ergometers, while being convenient for ﬁeld use because the
computations only require loaded jumps (accurately standardized and performed)
and three parameters rather easily measurable out of laboratory: body mass, jump
height and push-off distance. The use of this simple method as routine test gives
interesting information to coaches or physiotherapists: individual maximal power
output and F-v proﬁle. Validation studies, practical testing considerations and limits
of this simple method will be presented. This method makes possible the follow-up
of athlete muscle capabilities during a season or over several years, but also the
comparison between athletes, which can help to optimize training and individualize
loads and exercise modalities in strength training.
P. Samozino (&)
Laboratoire Inter-universitaire de Biologie de la Motricité, Université de Savoie Mont Blanc,
Campus Scientiﬁque, 73000 Le Bourget du Lac, Chambéry, France
e-mail: pierre.samozino@univ-smb.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_4
65


<!-- Page 70 -->
4.1
Introduction
Accelerating its own body mass is involved in most of animal locomotor behaviors,
notably in survival movements, whether to escape from predators or to capture
preys. Natural selection acts within populations to further the phenotypic traits that
improve such kind of abilities. Examining the factors that determine performance in
these ballistic movements could allow to better understand the morphological and
physiological adaptations characterizing a large variety of animals. In contrast, for
humans (who no longer require ballistic movements to survive), ballistic perfor-
mances are key factor in numerous sport activities (e.g., jumping, starting phase in
sprint running, changing of direction, throwing). The understanding and determi-
nation of the physical characteristics underlying ballistic movement optimization is
highly valued by performance professionals, such as strength and conditioning
coaches. Beyond sport situations, some of movements occurred during daily-life
activities can be considered as “ballistic” movements, such as standing up from a
sitting position for the elderly or individuals with diseases (Corcos et al. 1996; Mak
et al. 2003; Janssen et al. 2002). For these individuals, a sit-to-stand task represents
a dynamic maximum effort for which reduced strength or inability to perform rapid
muscle contractions can lead to impaired mobility and eventually to institutional-
ization (Mak et al. 2003; Corcos et al. 1996). So, one of the main questions
interesting sport practitioners and physiotherapists is to know which muscle qual-
ities to train or rehabilitate in order to increase (or to get back to a given level of)
ballistic performances.
Ballistic performances can be deﬁned as the ability to accelerate a mass as much
as possible to reach the highest velocity in the shortest time, be it its one’s own
mass (e.g., sprints or jumps) or an external mass (e.g., throws or shots).
Accelerating a mass can be performed during one unique movement (acyclic
movements), often a ballistic push-off when it consists in a lower or upper limb
extension (e.g. jumps, ﬁrst steps of a sprint, throws), or during an acceleration phase
over many consecutive movements or steps (cyclic movements, as sprint running
acceleration, Chaps. 10–13). Ballistic movements, notably jumping or sprint run-
ning, have often been investigated to better understand the mechanical limits of
skeletal muscle function in vivo, be it in animals (James et al. 2007; Lutz and Rome
1994) or in humans (Cormie et al. 2007d, 2011a; Jaric and Markovic 2009; Rabita
et al. 2015; Samozino et al. 2012).
From Newton’s law of motion, accelerating a mass require to apply external
force and to produce mechanical work on its center of mass. Being very schematic,
this requires “physical” capabilities, to produce the mechanical energy, and
“technical” abilities to effectively transfer this mechanical energy from active
muscles to center of mass of the body or of other moving system. These “technical”
abilities have to respect the speciﬁc constraints and demands of the targeted sport
activity via optimal motor behavior, segmental conﬁguration or coordination. The
present chapter, as well as the next ones, will only focus on “physical” capabilities
to produce the maximum mechanical work possible during one or more
66
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 71 -->
(see Chap. 6) ballistic movement(s). This can give new insights for strength and
conditioning training, while keeping in mind that producing high mechanical work
is interesting only when associated to good technical skills speciﬁc to the task.
The ability to quickly accelerate the body from a resting position is considered to
be particularly important for successful performance in many sport activities, be it
in track and ﬁeld events or in most of team, racket or combat sports. This ability in
ballistic movements is directly related to mechanical properties of the neuromus-
cular system, and notably to power capabilities. Jumping movements have often
been investigated to better understand and evaluate the lower limb mechanical
properties. Vertical jump is the most widely used movement to assess “explosive”
or “ballistic” qualities of lower limbs due to its simplicity, its very short duration
(<0.5 s) and so very high intensity (it is considered as one of the most “explosive”
movements) and its high correlation with peak power output (Davies and Young
1984).
Even if jumping tests will be brieﬂy presented in this chapter, lower limb
mechanical capabilities during dynamic extension cannot be only sum-up by
maximal power output, and even less by a single performance. Since power is the
product of force and velocity, muscle mechanical properties also include force and
velocity capabilities which represent two different properties: the ability to develop
very high levels of force and the ability to contract muscles—or extend limbs—at
very high velocities. Even if both affect maximal power, these two muscle capa-
bilities are independent. A good way to well understand this independency between
force and velocity qualities is the analogy between muscle mechanical properties
and vehicle engine capabilities. The latter are well described by the relationship
between the torque the engine can produce and the velocity at which it turns. And
when we compare this relationship between different vehicles (tractors and city or
sport cars), we can observe big differences resulting in different properties (Fig. 4.1,
Gülch 1994). The city or sport cars engine can go at high velocities, but cannot keep
moving when they have to tow a big and heavy trailer. At the opposite, the tractor
can move forward towing a trailer weighting several tons. And when the trailer is
removed, it does not go very faster, while we can expect that it intensively accel-
erates once the heavy load is off, since it was able to tow very high loads. This is
quite the same thing when the force generator is our neuromuscular system. The
athlete’s ability to move against very high loads is not associated to the capability to
move fast when the mechanical constraints are low. Force and velocity capabilities
are independent.
In this way, these different muscle capabilities cannot be distinguished from
mechanical outputs obtained from only one single test (Jaric 2016b). The maximum
vertical jump height is one of the best example since it has been indiscriminately
interpreted as either an index of force (Kawamori et al. 2006), velocity (Yamauchi
and Ishii 2007) or power (Cormie et al. 2011b) capabilities. During lower limb
dynamic extension, the muscle mechanical capabilities are well and entirely
described only by the force-velocity and power-velocity relationships (as presented
and detailed for pedaling movement in Chap. 2).
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
67


<!-- Page 72 -->
In this chapter, we will deﬁne the force- and power-velocity relationships during
ballistic lower limb push-off, the typical methods commonly used to determine
these muscle capabilities, and a simple method we developed to compute them
accurately out of labs. Practical applications will then be presented and discussed as
well as different technologies that can be used to measure the mechanical inputs of
this simple method.
4.2
Force, Velocity, Power Mechanical Proﬁle
4.2.1
Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Relationships
in Jumping
When we focus on all-out or ballistic performances, i.e. movements performed with
the highest intensity (force, velocity or power) possible, the performance is mainly
limited by the mechanical capabilities of the neuromuscular system during con-
centric contractions. The overall lower limb dynamic mechanical capabilities have
been well described by inverse force-velocity (F-v) and parabolic power-velocity
(P-v) relationships (Fig. 4.2). While the F-v relationships obtained on isolated
Fig. 4.1 Mechanical properties of the engine of three typical vehicles: a tractor, a sport car and a
city car (from Gülch 1994).
68
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 73 -->
muscles or mono-articular movements are described by a hyperbolic equation (Hill
1938; Thorstensson et al. 1976), linear relationships were consistently obtained for
multi-joint functional tasks such as pedaling, squat, leg press or sprint running
movements (e.g. Rahmani et al. 2001; Vandewalle et al. 1987a; Yamauchi and Ishii
2007; Bosco et al. 1995; Samozino et al. 2007; Bobbert 2012; Dorel et al. 2010;
Morin et al. 2010; Rabita et al. 2015; Jaric 2015).
During ballistic push-offs (e.g. leg press, squat, Samozino et al. 2012; Yamauchi
and Ishii 2007; Rahmani et al. 2001; Samozino et al. 2014), these relationships
describe the changes in the maximal capability of lower limbs to produce external
force and power output with increasing movement velocity over one extension.
They characterize the external mechanical limits of the entire neuromuscular sys-
tem. All the area under the F-v curve (Fig. 4.2) represents combinations of force
and velocity outputs than can be produced during submaximal movements, and the
F-v curve corresponds to outputs that can be produced during all-out push-offs. The
other force and velocity combinations beyond the F-v line are not possible for
muscles. These relationships put forward different typical parameters representing
the different muscle mechanical capabilities (for details, see Morin and Samozino
2016). The force-axis intercept of the F-v relationships (F0) represents the maximal
external force lower limbs could produce during a theoretical extension movement
at null velocity. The velocity-axis intercept (v0) corresponds to the maximal velocity
at which lower limbs could extend during a theoretical extension under zero load. It
should be interpreted as the maximal extension velocity until which lower limb
muscles can produce force. In other words, this is the athlete’s ability to produce
force at very high extension velocities. F0 and v0 are two purely theoretical values
which cannot be measured experimentally, but they have to be considered as
targeted values towards which maximal muscle capabilities tend when velocity
decreases or increases, respectively. Hence, F0 and v0 have to be understood as the
“force” and “velocity” maximal capabilities of the entire lower limbs. The apex of
Fig. 4.2 Schematic force-velocity (open circles) and power-velocity (black ﬁlled circles)
relationships for lower limb extensions during a typical leg press movement. Each point represent
a lower limb extension performed against a given load. Black lines represent linear and polynomial
regressions for force- and power-velocity relationships, respectively, dashed lines being their
respective extrapolations. The mechanical outputs F0, v0, Pmax are represented by the open
diamonds, Sfv being the slope of the force-velocity relationship
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
69


<!-- Page 74 -->
the P-v relationships (Pmax) is the maximal power output lower limbs can produce
over one extension and refers to the power capabilities. Under these conditions, the
relationship among these three parameters can be described by the following
mathematical equation: Pmax = F0 . v0/4 (details in Chap. 2, Vandewalle et al.
1987b; Samozino et al. 2012).
These mechanical properties obtained from multi-joint F-v and P-v relationships
characterize the mechanical limits of the entire neuromuscular function and so are a
complex integration of the different mechanisms involved in the total external force
produced during one limb extension. They encompass individual muscle mechanical
properties (e.g. intrinsic F-v and length-tension relationships, rate of force devel-
opment), some morphological factors (e.g. cross sectional area, fascicle length,
pennation angle, tendon properties), neural mechanisms (e.g. motor unit recruitment,
ﬁring frequency, motor unit synchronization, inter-muscular coordination) and
segmental dynamics (Cormie et al. 2011a; Bobbert 2012; Cormie et al. 2010a, b).
The inverse F-v relationship is often misunderstood since we have in mind that if
we increase the force applied to an object (or to the ground), we increase the
velocity of the object (or of our center of mass). And the F-v relationship says the
opposite: force and velocity change in opposite ways. In fact, there is no opposition
between these two observations. They just do not refer to the same mechanical
constraints. The ﬁrst one (velocity increases when force applied increases or when
resistance decreases) is the expression of the fundamental principles of dynamics
well known through the Newton’s laws of motion. They are the mechanical con-
straints imposed by Earth physical laws on human (or all other objects) movements.
The second one (force decreases when velocity increases) corresponds to the
mechanical properties of the neuromuscular system, and so to the mechanical
constraints imposed by the biology on human movements performed with maximal
effort (all-out). When physics says that velocity depends on force (2nd Newton’s
law of motion), physiology says that force depends on velocity (F-v relationship).
During sport activities, physical laws are the same for everybody, muscle
mechanical properties are not. And ballistic push-off performance is the best
solution of both mechanical constraints (this will be detailed in Chap. 5).
4.2.2
Force-Velocity Mechanical Proﬁle in Jumping
Beyond maximal force, velocity and power capabilities, the F-v relationships bring
out another interesting information for scientists and coaches: the lower limb
force-velocity mechanical proﬁle. It is the slope of the F-v relationship (SFV) and
represents the individual ratio between force and velocity qualities (SFV = -F0/v0).
When the F-v relationship is graphically represented with a vertical force-axis, the
steeper the slope, the more negative its value, the more “force-oriented” the F-V
proﬁle, and vice versa. The F-v proﬁle is very interesting for the following reasons.
Independent from Pmax. The athlete’s F-v proﬁle put forward insights about
muscle mechanical qualities independently from power capabilities. Two athletes
70
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 75 -->
can present the same Pmax values with different F-v proﬁles (Fig. 4.3). The athlete
with a “force proﬁle” (i.e. a F-v proﬁle more oriented toward force capabilities)
develops his Pmax at a higher force and a lower velocity than an athlete with a
“velocity proﬁle”, while both produce the same Pmax. Since there is no direct
relationship with Pmax, the F-v proﬁle brings another valuable information about the
individual mechanical muscle properties.
Sensible to strength training. The F-v proﬁle is sensible to training interven-
tion, which is of great interest for strength and conditioning coaches. Changes in the
F-v relationship, notably in its slope, can be achieved by speciﬁc strength training
(Cormie et al. 2007c, 2010a, b, 2011b; Kaneko et al. 1983; McBride et al. 2002).
The maximal force capabilities can be improved through strength training with
heavy loads (>75–80% of one repetition maximum) while velocity capabilities can
be increased by training with maximal efforts and light (e.g. <30% of one repetition
maximum) or negative loading, which is often referred to as “ballistic” or “power”
training (McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al. 2010a, b; Cronin et al. 2001; Markovic
et al. 2011; Argus et al. 2011). Note that when training focus on maximal force
improvements, the velocity capabilities does not change, and vice versa (Cormie
et al. 2010a). This underlined the independency between force and velocity capa-
bilities, both ballistic and heavy strength training being associated to different
physiological and neural adaptations (Cormie et al. 2010a, 2011a). This is quite the
same history as for vehicle engines presented in the introduction section of this
chapter.
Large inter-individual differences. Besides to be sensible to strength training,
the other important point which confers great interest in F-v proﬁle for training
purposes is the fact that it presents very big differences between individuals. The
initial works on F-v relationships obtained during pedaling exercises of Vandewalle
and colleagues at the end of eighties well showed that force, velocity and power
Fig. 4.3 Schematic force-velocity and power-velocity relationships for two hypothetical athletes
presenting the same maximal power output (PMAX) and two opposite force-velocity proﬁles: an
athlete with a “force” proﬁle characterized by a high maximal force (F0) and low maximal velocity
(v0) (white diamonds and dashed lines), an athlete with a “velocity” proﬁle characterized by a low
F0 and a high v0 (black ﬁlled circles and continuous lines)
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
71


<!-- Page 76 -->
capabilities were very different across individuals of different ages, expertise levels
or sport activities (Vandewalle et al. 1987a, b). During lower limb push-off, same
large inter-individual differences can be observed between men and women or
between different sport activities (Bosco et al. 1995; Giroux et al. 2016). Giroux
et al. (2016) recently reported F- and P-v relationships of world class men and
women athletes across different sport activities (Giroux et al. 2016). Between track
cyclists, sprinters, taekwondo and fencing athletes, Pmax, F0 and v0 values lots of
differed even if all these sports can be considered as explosive activities (Fig. 4.4).
These differences can be due to the speciﬁc mechanical demands of each activities
and/or to their respective strength training habits. Even if this was not the aim of
these study, data of Giroux et al. (2016) and Bosco et al. (1995) showed that
differences in Pmax between men and women were mainly explained by differences
in velocity capabilities (Fig. 4.4). We can see that for some world class athletes in
some sports (e.g. track cyclist, sprinters or taekwondo athletes), muscle mechanical
capabilities differed only in v0 between men and women, resulting in higher Pmax,
for men. Finally, within a same team sport activity, important differences can be
observed between players according to their position, their training history and/or
their intrinsic properties. And sometimes, F-v proﬁles do not follow what we can
expect. The typical example presented in Fig. 4.5 shows the F-v relationships of
two professional rugby players: a forward (body mass: 102 kg, stature: 1.76 m) and
a back (body mass: 86 kg, stature: 1.84 m) player. We could expect (notably from
his morphology) that the forward player would present a more “force-oriented”
Fig. 4.4 Power- and Force-velocity relationships of men and women recreational individuals and
world class sprinting, cycling, fencing and taekwondo athletes. Maximal power and maximal
theoretical force and velocity values are presented (ﬁlled circles) (Modiﬁed from Giroux et al.
2016)
72
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 77 -->
proﬁle (as a tractor) than the back player. This is not actually the case, mainly due to
the very large and impressive velocity capabilities of the forward player. His
absolute maximal force is also very high, but when expressed relatively to his body
mass (which is important for ballistic performances), force capabilities are even
lower than backward player’s ones. During the leg press movement experimenta-
tion, the forward player’s ability to fast extend his legs against low resistance was
more impressive than his capacity to move against heavy loads.
The complementarity of these different variables to well characterize muscle
mechanical capabilities (F0 and v0, or Pmax and F-v proﬁle), their large
inter-individual differences, their sensibility to strength training and their high
importance in ballistic performances (see Chap. 5 for more details) support the great
interest to accurately evaluate them for sport scientists and sport practitioners.
4.3
Reference Testing Methods
4.3.1
Methodological Considerations
Muscle contraction modalities. The determination of lower limb F-v and P-v
relationships require several all-out limb extensions performed in different
mechanical conditions, each one corresponding to different force, velocity and
power values. The different experimental methods require:
• either to control the force developed in order to maintain it constant all over the
movement and to measure the movement velocity: isotonic condition. Tests are
performed at different force values (e.g. Yamauchi and Ishii 2007; Yamauchi
et al. 2005).
• either to control movement velocity to maintain it constant all over the move-
ment and to measure the force produced: isokinetic condition. Tests are per-
formed at different velocity values (e.g. Sargeant et al. 1981; Wilson et al.
1997).
Fig. 4.5 Force-velocity
relationships of two
1st-Italian league rugby
players: a back (player #1,
ﬁlled circles, dash line) and a
forward player (player #2,
black points and continuous
line). Each point represents a
lower limb extension
performed against a given
load during leg press
exercises
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
73


<!-- Page 78 -->
• either to control and maintain constant the resistance acting against the move-
ment and to measure both force produced and movement velocity: isoinertial or
isoload condition. The resistance can be inertia (e.g. additional mass) and/or
resistive force (e.g. weight of additional loads, elastic band or pneumatic force).
Tests are performed at a given resistance, resulting in different force and
velocity values which are both measured (e.g. Rahmani et al. 2004; Bosco et al.
1995; Samozino et al. 2014; Cuk et al. 2014; Markovic et al. 2011).
Isokinetic or isotonic testing conditions present many advantages, notably a best
control of the mechanical modalities in which the task is realized and a higher
safety for subjects. These two methodological concerns, very important in medical,
scientiﬁc or sport ﬁelds, explain the widely use of isokinetic movements in muscle
capacity testing, isotonic modality being less commonly used due to the technical
difﬁculty to maintain constant the force produced. However, isokinetic conditions
have often been challenged in sport ﬁeld because some methodological require-
ments are not always respected (Gülch 1994), and especially because the movement
is not “natural” due to constant velocities which are very rare, if not inexistent, in
daily life and sport activities (Gülch 1994; Kannus 1994). Indeed, human move-
ments are characterized by acceleration and deceleration of its whole body mass,
the mass of a body segment or an external mass. Most of time in actual human
performances, the mass of the moving system is constant all over the movement,
but the force produced and the movement velocity change. Consequently, lower
limb mechanical capabilities testing is well advised to be performed in isoload or
isoinertial conditions, notably as part of exploring or training ballistic perfor-
mances. That is why we will focus on isoinertial conditions in the following
sections.
Peak versus averaged variables. Testing muscle properties, as for all kind of
physical tests, requires to identify the variable(s) which better characterize(s) the
muscular effort expended. When we explore the muscle maximal capabilities, the
measured parameters are commonly the force produced, the movement velocity and
the resulting power output. These three mechanical output can be quantiﬁed and
presented in two different forms: instantaneous (often peak) values (e.g. Yamauchi
et al. 2007; McCartney et al. 1983) or averaged values over one leg extension (e.g.
Arsac et al. 1996; Rahmani et al. 2001; Bosco et al. 1995; Zamparo et al. 1997).
The choice between instantaneous and averaged values depends on what we have to
assess. In 1983, Andrews (Andrews 1983) suggested that:
• Instantaneous values are adapted to describe the value of a variable at a
speciﬁc time of the movement (e.g. take-off during jumping or heel-ground
contact during running) or to characterize extreme values of a parameter over a
movement (e.g. extreme joint angles to compute range of motion, maximal
running speed, minimum heart rate).
• Averaged values (or more generally values representing a time interval) are
adapted to characterize an effort or a movement in its entirety, notably when the
parameter signiﬁcantly changes over the effort or the movement.
74
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 79 -->
It is worth noting that the two types of values are strongly related during ballistic
movements, with for instance averaged values of power output between 40 and
60% of maximal instantaneous values (Marsh 1994; Martin et al. 1997; Driss et al.
2001). So, the general shape of Force- and Power-velocity relationships are quasi
the same, only value magnitudes change (Martin et al. 1997).
When we aim to evaluate muscle mechanical capabilities, we want to charac-
terize the lower limb maximal capabilities to produce force or power over one
extension. However, force production capabilities change all over lower limb
extension: besides to depend on movement velocity, they are affected by the
torque-angle (force-length) relationship of muscle groups involved at each joint
(e.g. Thorstensson et al. 1976), by the time required for muscles to reach their
maximum active state (e.g. van Soest and Casius 2000), or by muscle coordination
patterns (e.g. Suzuki et al. 1982; Van Soest et al. 1994). So, only focusing on the
instantaneous peak values measured during a functional movement does not make
lots of sense since this values would correspond to a very speciﬁc anatomical and
neuromuscular conﬁguration and does not represent the whole dynamic lower limb
capabilities. Consequently, even it is still source of debate (Dugan et al. 2004;
Vandewalle et al. 1987b), we think that using force, velocity and power values
averaged over the entire extension movement seems to be adapted to characterize
these mechanical capabilities (e.g. Arsac et al. 1996; Bassey and Short 1990;
Samozino et al. 2007, 2012; Rahmani et al. 2001). Moreover, from a purely
mechanical point of view, dynamic principles show that the change in momentum
of a system depend directly to the net mechanical impulse applied on it over the
entire movement. So, ballistic performances do not depend on the maximum force
or power output lower limb muscles are able to produce at a given (very short) time
during their extension, but depend especially to force or power output muscles are
able to produce over the entire extension phase allowing maximisation of the net
mechanical impulse. And this is better described by averaged than by peak
instantaneous values.
4.3.2
Laboratory Methods
As presented in Chaps. 2 and 3, lower limb mechanical capabilities were ﬁrst
described through F-v and P-v relationships during pedaling movement in eighties
(Seck et al. 1995; Arsac et al. 1996; Martin et al. 1997; Hintzy et al. 1999;
McCartney et al. 1983, 1985; Sargeant et al. 1981). Even if pedaling is very
pertinent and convenient to assess lower limb extensor muscle capabilities,
mechanical outputs produced during this cyclic movement depend directly to very
speciﬁc muscle coordination (Samozino et al. 2007; van Soest and Casius 2000;
Dorel et al. 2012, more details in Chap. 3) and so are quite different from what
lower limbs can produce during one ballistic push-off as a jump or a sprint start.
The primary acyclic movement used to determine F-v and P-v relationships are
squat or squat jump (when a take-off occurs) movements during which the body
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
75


<!-- Page 80 -->
mass (and external mass) is moved up in the vertical direction. Even if the vertical
jump is widely used to assess lower limb ballistic capabilities, the ﬁrst studies (and
the only one until the last few years) exploring F-v and P-v relationships during this
kind of lower limb movements are the works of both Bosco’s and Rahmani’s teams
(Bosco et al. 1995; Rahmani et al. 2001; Bosco and Komi 1979; Rahmani et al.
2004). They described, during squats and squat jumps, these two relationships as
linear and parabolic, respectively. In contrast to pedaling, these relationships
describe here the mechanical capabilities of both lower limbs acting together (bi-
lateral movement) and require several distinct movements performed against sev-
eral loads or external resistances: each load/resistance is associated to a movement
velocity, a force and a power produced, and so correspond to one point of the F-v
and P-v relationships (Fig. 4.2).
Different devices exist to measure the force and power output produced by lower
limbs, as well as their extension velocity, during a vertical push-off phase. In the
late XIXth century, Etienne-Jules Marey and George Demeny studied vertical
jumps combining kinematic and dynamic analyses, notably using chronophotog-
raphy and dynamograph, ancestors of optoelectronic and force plate systems,
respectively (Marey and Demeny 1885). Since these ﬁrst experimentations, force
plates have remained the lab device the most used to measure forces applied onto
the ground, but also to determine continuously the body center of mass acceleration,
velocity and displacement during the push-off phase of a vertical jump (Fig. 4.6,
Bosco and Komi 1979; Harman et al. 1991; Driss et al. 2001; Ferretti et al. 1987;
Rahmani et al. 2001; Davies and Rennie 1968) or a contact phase during walking or
running (Cavagna 1975). Note that the center of mass velocity during vertical jump
has been often used to estimate lower limb extension velocity since feet do not
move during push-off. The product of force and velocity data at each instant gives
lower limb power output. Since a value of force, power and velocity can be
obtained at each push-off phase, and so at each jump, F-v and P-v relationships can
be determined from several jumps with different loads. In contrast to pedaling or
sprint running movements, the force (vertical component) measured by force plate
during vertical jumping corresponds to the quasi-total external force developed by
lower limbs (horizontal force components are very low and negligible).
Other devices, less expensive than force plates and easier to use with strength
training systems in weights room, were then developed to measure force, velocity
and power during squat or jumps. In 1995, Bosco proposed to measure these
parameters from only the displacement of the moving mass (body mass and
additional mass) obtained from an optical sensor. This kinematic method, validated
few years later by Rahmani in comparison to force plate measurements (Rahmani
et al. 1998, 2000) consists in deriving twice over time the displacement signal to
obtain center of mass velocity and acceleration, and then net external force
developed. Based on this methodology, several systems have then been proposed
using linear position transducers or accelerometers to measure directly the accel-
eration (Cormie et al. 2007a, b; Harris et al. 2007; Giroux et al. 2015; McMaster
et al. 2014; Comstock et al. 2011; Cronin et al. 2004). Other lower limb extension
movements have been also used to evaluate mechanical muscle capabilities during
76
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 81 -->
inclined or horizontal push-offs with different kind of ergometers measuring force,
velocity and power output during push-off phase (Zamparo et al. 1997; Yamauchi
et al. 2007; Avis et al. 1985; Pearson et al. 2004; Bassey and Short 1990; Macaluso
and De Vito 2003; Zamparo et al. 2000; Samozino et al. 2012). The non-vertical
orientation makes possible to change the gravity magnitude against which the
movement is performed and to vary the body conﬁguration (notably hip angle and
range of motion (Padulo et al. 2017). Many of these devices have led to F-v and P-v
relationship determination (e.g. Yamauchi and Ishii 2007; Samozino et al. 2012).
The different methodologies used in laboratory to determine force, velocity and
power muscles capabilities present very high accuracy and high reliability. The
standard error of measurement ranges from *3 to *10% and intraclass correlation
coefﬁcient from *0.85 to *0.99 according to the device, the protocol or the
movement tested (Cuk et al. 2014; Giroux et al. 2015; Rahmani et al. 2001). Be it
during vertical or horizontal movements, Pmax, v0 and F0 values are very different
according to subject levels and vary between 700 and 3500 W (from *15 to
Fig. 4.6 Vertical force,
velocity and power output
signals obtained from force
plate measurements during a
squat jump (push-off and
ﬂight phases)
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
77


<!-- Page 82 -->
45 W kg−1), between 1000 and 3000 N (from *20 to 50 N kg−1) et between 2 and
8 m s−1, respectively. However, the main limit of such lab methodologies is that
they are not compatible with the daily constraints of the main users. Indeed,
evaluating muscle mechanical capabilities is in the center of the training process of
many sport activities. So this is of great interest for coaches and strength and
conditioning coaches who look for simple, cheap and quick methods which can be
easily set up in ﬁeld conditions. This is not the case for such lab methods requiring
very speciﬁc and expensive tools, as well as advanced skills in data acquisition and
analysis. So, the above-mentioned laboratory methods on jumping movements have
existed for more than 20 years, but very little used by sport practitioners. The later
prefer performed tests convenient in ﬁeld conditions, even if less accurate.
4.3.3
Field Methods
Before the few last years, no method have made possible the determination of Pmax
and F-v relationship out of laboratory and without skilled persons. However,
maximal power, force and velocity capabilities have been assessed directly or
indirectly by coaches using different simple methodologies.
Maximal strength. Out of laboratory, the maximum force the lower limb
extensor muscles are able to produce is usually evaluated through the maximum
load the athlete can move one time over an entire extension movement (one rep-
etition maximum, 1RM). Different protocols exist to determine it on lower limbs
during squat or a leg press exercises, all of them using increasing loads.
Considering the inverse F-v relationship, the maximum muscle force can be pro-
duced at null velocity, which corresponds to isometric contraction. Even if the
movement is realized at a non-negligible velocity, the one maximum repetition load
is a good index of maximal dynamic strength. This test is convenient for ﬁeld using
and present a high reliability (McMaster et al. 2014; Seo et al. 2012; Verdijk et al.
2009). Moreover, the maximum isometric force depends directly on the joint (hip,
knee and ankle for lower limb) angles at which the effort is performed and requires
dynamometers to be measured. Very recently, the 1RM strength index was com-
pared to F0 by situating the 1RM point along the F-v relationship (Riviere et al.
2017). On the velocity axis, the 1RM point was shown to be situated at *30% from
F0 and *70% from the point corresponding to the SJ performed with the highest
load. On the force axis, the 1RM point was *11% below F0 and *16% above the
highest force obtained during loaded SJs. This suggests that 1RM performance is
affected partly (even slightly) by velocity qualities, and so does not represent only
pure force capacities, even if it still represents a good practical index of dynamic
maximal strength (Riviere et al. 2017).
Maximal extension velocity. When sport practitioners want to assess lower
limb velocity capabilities of their athletes, they often measure a performance
associated to high movement velocities, such a vertical jump, a sprint time or an
agility test performance. However, beside to depend on muscular velocity qualities,
78
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 83 -->
each of these movements also require force production, and the velocity reached is
far to be maximal. So, assessing the maximal extension velocity of lower limb
cannot be performed measuring the performance of a movement depending on both
force and velocity, and so on power output.
Maximal power output. Different ﬁeld tests have been proposed to simply
assess lower limb maximal power output, one of the most famous (but not com-
monly used) is the Margaria stair test (Margaria et al. 1966). Vertical jumps have
remained the most widely used tests to assess power capabilities due to its sim-
plicity, its very short duration and very high intensity. In 1921, Dudley Allen
Sargent proposed the ﬁrst ﬁeld method to estimate the vertical displacement of the
center of mass during a vertical jump by the difference between the maximal height
reached by the hand during the jump and in standing position, both with the upper
limb extended to the top. Some years later, in 1924, the jump height associated to
this test was proposed as a measure of muscle power by a namesake, Sargent
(1924). Other simple methods were then proposed to estimate the center of mass
displacement during a jump though the roll-out of a ribbon attached to the athlete’s
waist (Abalakov’s test) or the ﬂight time of the jump (Bosco’s test). Flight time
measurement was made possible by the use of “timer” mat (e.g. ErgojumpTM,
Bosco 1992) or photocells placed at some millimeters above the ground (e.g.
Optojump®), both easy to bring and use in ﬁeld conditions. Jump height can be then
computed using Newton’s law of motion, as ﬁrstly proposed by Asmussen and
Bonde-Petersen (1974). Several jumping modalities exist, each of them being
associated to speciﬁc muscle mechanical properties: squat jump (starting from a
crouching position), countermovement jump (starting from a standing upright
position followed by a downward countermovement before jumping), drop jump
(starting upright from an elevated place) and rebound jumps (hopping during a
given time, see Chap. 6). Although maximal jump height was shown to be highly
correlated to Pmax, this does not give a power values, nor force or velocity ones.
Consequently, the jump height as an index of power capabilities can be biased by
the subject body mass and the lower limb range of motion. Two athletes of different
mass and jumping at the same height do not develop the same power output, the
heavier one being more powerful. In the same way, two athletes with the same body
mass but different vertical push-off distances (lower limb range of motion over
which the push-off is performed) and jumping at the same height do not produce the
same power, the athlete using the shorter push-off distance being more powerful.
So, jump height alone cannot be an accurate index of maximal power output.
For these reasons, different formulae have been proposed (still recently, see
review McMaster et al. 2014) to estimate the power produced during a vertical jump
from jump height and body mass (Table 4.1). Some of them were developed from
fundamental principles of dynamics (Gray et al. 1962; Lewis formulae cited in Fox
and Mathews 1974), but the biomechanical models from which they are based have
been challenged (Harman et al. 1991). All the other formulae were statistically
determined from regression equations obtained from experimental measurements
(Table 4.1, Johnson and Bahamonde 1996; Canavan and Vescovi 2004; Harman
et al. 1991; Sayers et al. 1999; Lara et al. 2006a, b; Shetty 2002; Bahamonde 2005;
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
79


<!-- Page 84 -->
Wright et al. 2012). Besides the lack of theoretical background, the main limit of
this kind of formulae is their dependence to the population from which they were
obtained, which can lead to important error in the power estimation (from 3 to 40%,
Lara et al. 2006a, b; McMaster et al. 2014).
In 1983, Carmelo Bosco proposed a simple test to measure lower limb power
output during series of rebound jumps over 15–60 s (Bosco et al. 1983). The
mathematical formulae based on Newton laws of motion give validated power
values. However, this power is the mean power developed over series of jumps, and
does not correspond to the maximal power output lower limbs can produce over one
extension.
4.3.4
Limitations of the Reference Methods
On one side, laboratory methodologies present very accurate and reliable mea-
surement of the different muscle mechanical qualities (force, velocity and power
capabilities) but are not widely used by sport practitioners due to the need of
expensive tools and very speciﬁc skills in data analysis. On the other side, simple
tests used in routine in ﬁeld conditions are not very accurate and valid and do not
allow coaches to evaluate the entire spectrum of muscle capabilities, notably the
athlete’s F-v proﬁle. It is worth noting that the different tests and formulae fre-
quently proposed, notably to estimate maximal power output, well show the great
interest, past or present (from 1962 to nowadays), to evaluate muscle mechanical
capabilities with simple methodologies easily usable out of laboratories.
In order to answer to this need while considering the limitations of previous
tests, we proposed a simple ﬁeld method to compute accurately force, velocity and
power lower limb capabilities from few data inputs that are easy to obtain in typical
training practice.
Table 4.1 Equations previously proposed to indirectly estimate lower limb power output (from
Lara et al 2006a)
Authors
Equations
Lewis
Power = √4.9  9.8  body mass (kg)  √(jump height (m))
Harman et al. (1991)
Power = 61.9  jump height (cm) + 36  body mass (kg) −1822
Bahamonde (2005)
Power = 78.5  jump height (cm) + 60.6  body mass
(kg) −15.3  height (cm) −1308
Sayers et al. (1999)
Power = 60.7  jump height (cm) + 45.3  body mass (kg) −2055
Shetty (2002)
Power = 1925.7  jump height (cm) + 14.7  body mass
(kg) −66.3
Canavan and Vescovi
(2004)
Power = 65.1  jump height (cm) + 25.8  body mass
(kg) −1413.1
Lara et al. (2006a)
Power = 62.5  jump height (cm) + 50.3  body mass
(kg) −2184.7
80
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 85 -->
4.4
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity
and Power During Jumping
4.4.1
Theoretical Bases and Equations
The simple method is based on the fundamental principles of dynamics applied to
the body center of mass during a vertical jump and on the analyses of its mechanical
energy (kinetic and potential) at different speciﬁc instants of the movement
(Fig. 4.7). This gives the following equations (for detailed computations, see
Samozino et al. 2008) to compute the mean force (F) and power output (P) produced
by lower limbs during one vertical jump and their mean extension velocity (v):
F ¼ m:g:
h
hPO
þ 1


ð4:1Þ
v ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g:h
2
r
ð4:2Þ
P ¼ m:g:
h
hPO
þ 1



ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
g:h
2
r
ð4:3Þ
Fig. 4.7 The three key positions during a loaded vertical squat jump and the three distances used
in the computations of the simple method
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
81


<!-- Page 86 -->
These 3 equations required only three input variables to estimate force, velocity
and power during one jump: m the athlete body mass + additional mass (if any, in
kg), h the jump height (in m) and hPO the push-off distance which is the vertical
distance over which the force is produced and thus corresponds to the lower limb
length change between the starting position (hs) and the moment of takeoff
(Fig. 4.7). These three input variables are easy to obtain out of laboratory (see
“technologies and inputs measurements” section).
Using these three equations for vertical jumps performed with different addi-
tional loads gives different points of the F-v relationship: the higher the moving
mass (body mass + additional mass), the higher the force and the lower the
velocity. Plotting F versus v and modeling this relationship by a linear equation
gives the F-v relationship which can be extrapolated to obtain the maximal force
(F0) and velocity (v0) values as the intercept with the force- and velocity-axis,
respectively (Fig. 4.2). The maximal power output (Pmax) can be computed as the
apex of the 2nd order polynomial P-v relationship (if the number and range of the
computed F-v points are sufﬁcient), or easier by the following validated equation
(Samozino et al. 2012; Vandewalle et al. 1987a):
Pmax ¼ F0  v0
4
ð4:4Þ
4.4.2
Limits of the Method
The theoretical computations on which were developed the above-mentioned
equations are based on fundamental principles of dynamics. However, some
mathematical and physical simplifying assumptions have been required to express
F, v and P from only three simple parameters.
• The Newton’s laws were applied to a whole body considered as a system and
represented by its center of mass (e.g. Bosco and Komi 1979; Harman et al. 1990).
So, only the mechanical energy applied to the center of mass was considered.
• The air resistance was neglected since it was shown to only affect very small
animals jump height (body mass below 0.5 g, Scholz et al. 2006).
• It was supposed that the center of mass vertical displacement during push-off
corresponds to the lower limb length change (i.e. hPO), whereas the actual
relative position of the center of mass within the body shifts slightly downwards
due to the lower limb extension. This simpliﬁcation was necessary to make hPO
measurement possible during ﬁeld testing (see “technologies and inputs mea-
surements” section).
• The mean power output over the push-off phase was computed as the product of
the averaged values of force and velocity, which was mathematically wrong per
se. Mean power is the average of instantaneous power values computed as the
product of instantaneous force and velocity values. However, during an
explosive movement during which the movement is only accelerated in one
direction, the induced error is minor.
82
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 87 -->
Knowing these different simplifying assumptions, it was important to quantify
the errors they induced on mechanical variables, as well as the errors induced by the
measurements of the three input variables with devices usable out of laboratories.
So, the three equations and the simple method were validated in comparison to the
gold standard force plate measurements.
4.4.3
Validation of the Method
The simple method has been the object of different validation protocols done by our
research group, but also by others.
The ﬁrst protocol aimed at validating the three equations to compute F, v and
P during unloaded and loaded vertical jumps (Samozino et al. 2008). Eleven male
physically active men performed two maximal squat jumps without and with 3
different additional loads (25, 50 and 75% of body weight). During each trial, F,
v and P were calculated during push-off from both force plate measurements
(Kistler type 9861A, Winterthur, Switzerland, 2000 Hz) and the proposed com-
putations. For the latter, jump height was obtained from ﬂight time and hPO mea-
sured a priori as the difference between the great trochanter height in the crouch
starting position (hs, Fig. 4.7) and the extended lower limb length with maximal
foot plantar ﬂexion (great trochanter to tiptoe distance, see “technologies and inputs
measurements”). The systematic bias between the two methods were not signiﬁcant
and lower than 2% for force, and lower than 8% for velocity and power whatever
the load. The random errors ranged between 1 and 9% (Table 4.2). The concurrent
validity of the computation method was also highlighted by high correlation and
linear regressions close to the identity line (for full details and statistics, see
Samozino et al. 2008). The low changes in the mean, low standard error of mea-
surements and high intraclass coefﬁcient between the two trials demonstrated the
good reliability of the simple method whatever the additional load (Table 4.3). This
reliability is in line with (and even better than) the reliability obtained with the
reference method, which shows that the difference between both trials is due to the
intra-individual variability in a jumping task (biological error, Hopkins et al. 2001).
These results supported that the errors induced by the simplifying assumptions on
which equations were developed are very low. The proposed method, solely based
on three simple parameters easily obtained in ﬁeld conditions (body mass, jump
height and push-off distance), is valid and reliable to compute force, velocity and
power developed by lower limb extensor muscles during loaded and unloaded squat
jumps.
In 2014, an Italian research group tested the validity of the simple method to
quantify power output during jumping comparing it to a method based on a
multibody model that simulates the jumps processing the data obtained by a
three-dimensional (3D) motion capture system and the dynamometric measure-
ments obtained by the force platforms (Palmieri et al. 2015). The comparison gave
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
83


<!-- Page 88 -->
Table 4.2 Mean ± SD of force, velocity and power output obtained with force plate and simple
methods, systematic bias and random error between the two methods and characteristics of
correlations between the two methods
Load
(% body
mass)
Force plate
Simple
method
Systematic
Bias (%)
Random
error (%)
Pearson
correlation
coefﬁcient
(r)
Force
(N)
0
1294 ± 132
1282 ± 133
−0.88
1.94
0.98
***
25
1451 ± 143
1433 ± 141
−1.20
1.70
0.99
***
50
1554 ± 151
1557 ± 153
0.21
2.21
0.97
***
75
1675 ± 175
1654 ± 170
1.20
1.43
0.99
***
All
conditions
−0.77
1.90
0.99
***
Velocity
(m s−1)
0
1.08 ± 0.12
1.10 ± 0.12
1.62
3.15
0.96
***
25
0.96 ± 0.11
0.95 ± 0.10
−1.30
4.63
0.92
***
50
0.81 ± 0.11
0.80 ± 0.10
−0.18
6.17
0.87
***
75
0.72 ± 0.07
0.66 ± 0.09
−7.93
8.84
0.72
***
All
conditions
0.05
4.89
0.96
***
Power
output
(W)
0
1412 ± 221
1411 ± 224
−0.14
3.04
0.98
***
25
1389 ± 198
1357 ± 186
−2.13
4.49
0.95
***
50
1253 ± 198
1246 ± 187
−0.30
6.64
0.88
***
75
1182 ± 142
1085 ± 152
−8.07
8.41
0.76
***
All
conditions
−0.86
4.96
0.92
***
***P < 0.001
Table 4.3 Inter-trial reliability parameters for the simple method
Load
(% body
mass)
Change in the
mean (%)
Standard error of
measurement (%)
Intraclass
coefﬁcient
Force
plate
Simple
method
Force
plate
Simple
method
Force
plate
Simple
method
Force
(N)
0
0.32
0.64
2.52
2.56
0.94
0.94
25
0.68
−0.30
1.47
1.57
0.98
0.98
50
−1.37
0.30
2.24
1.46
0.95
0.98
75
0.18
0.07
1.70
1.82
0.97
0.97
Velocity
(m s−1)
0
2.22
2.32
6.23
3.84
0.70
0.89
25
0.06
−0.60
5.70
3.27
0.78
0.91
50
−3.79
0.21
7.93
3.60
0.66
0.93
75
−0.15
−1.28
7.47
5.91
0.50
0.82
Power
(W)
0
2.55
2.96
7.24
6.35
0.79
0.85
25
0.79
−0.89
5.72
4.66
0.85
0.89
50
−4.36
0.51
9.22
5.13
0.67
0.89
75
−0.19
−1.21
8.55
7.89
0.52
0.70
84
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 89 -->
errors lower than 6% on mean power output and mechanical work over the
push-off, that “can be accepted for the beneﬁt of a very simple procedure which
requires very few data as input”. The same year, Caroline Giroux and the research
team of the French National Institute of Sport determined the concurrent validity
and reliability of force, velocity and power capabilities measurements provided by
the simple method (jump height obtained from ﬂight time using an optical mea-
surement system, OptojumpNext®, Mircogate, Bolzano-Bozen, Italy), force plate
(Kistler, Wintertur, Switzerland), accelerometer (Myotest Pro®, Myotest SA, Sion,
Switzerland) and linear position transducer (GymAware®, Kinetic Performance,
Mitchell, Australia) during loaded squats jumps (Giroux et al. 2015). Values
obtained by the simple method showed very good agreement with force plate
measurements, similar to accelerometer or linear position transducer (low bias
between 2.6 and 3.2%, narrow conﬁdence intervals ranging from 6.2 to 12.7%). All
methods were shown to be reliable, especially the simple method (ICC = 0.97–
0.99; SEM = 2.7–8.6%). The authors concluded from their results and the ease of
use of the simple method that “this method is suitable for monitoring power
training sessions under ﬁeld conditions”.
Very recently, we validated the simple method computations and their validity to
determine F-v relationships during countermovement jumps (CMJ) representing
more commonly used movements in all sport activities (Jimenez-Reyes et al. 2016).
The mechanical capabilities derived from F-v relationships (F0, v0, Pmax and F-v
proﬁle) were obtained with both the simple method and force plate measurements
(Bertec, Type 4060-15, Bertec Corporation, Columbus, OH, USA). Results showed
high agreement between values obtained by both methods (mean absolute bias
values between 0.9 and 3.7%) and high reliability of the simple method when
applied during CMJ (ICC > 0.98). This supports the accuracy of the simple
method, not only to compute F, v and P during one vertical jump, but also to
determine F-v relationships from several loaded SJ or CMJ.
4.5
Technologies and Input Measurements
The accuracy and reliability of the simple method depends on both validity of
equations (see previous section for details) and accuracy of the devices and tech-
nologies used to obtain the mechanical inputs of the models (m, h and hPO), notably
jump height and push-off distance.
4.5.1
Jump Height
Jump height (h) can be easily measured out of laboratories using different
methodologies and devices (see Sect. 4.3.3). Most of them are based on the ﬂight
time and laws of motion to determine the center of mass elevation after take-off
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
85


<!-- Page 90 -->
(Bosco and Komi 1979). Even if the ﬂight time method was very accurate and
reliable, it requires ﬁeld equipment detecting contact and no contact with the
ground, and forces subjects to land in the same leg position as they take off. Such
devices detect ground contact from optical measurement system just above the
ground (e.g., OptojumpNextTM, Glatthorn et al. 2011), contact pressure on the
ground (e.g., Ergojump™), accelerometry (e.g. MyotestTM, Casartelli et al. 2010)
or video analysis (e.g. MyJump, Balsalobre-Fernandez et al. 2015). The main
advantage of ﬂight time methods is that the upper limb are free, which allows them
to hold additional loads on shoulders. This is not the case for the well-known
Sargent test (or similar) during which the athlete has to touch a wall (or other
devices, e.g. VertecTM) the highest as possible with the hand. Video analysis can
also be used to measure directly the vertical displacement of one point of the body
which does not move relatively to the center of mass after take-off (e.g. a point at
the hip or shoulders).
Whatever the methodology, the accuracy and the resolution of the jump height
measurement directly affect the accuracy of force, velocity and power computations.
For instance, for a device measuring ﬂight time with a resolution of 30 data per
second (as a standard video camera at 30 fps), the potential error on power values is
between 7 and 19%. Increasing the resolution leads to lower errors: from 4 to 10%
for 60 fps, from 2 to 6% for 120 fps, and from 1.3 to 3.5% for 180 fps. Recently,
smartphones present cameras that allow for slow motion modes with up to 240 fps
(e.g. Apple iPhone 6 and subsequent models). The ﬂight time determination can be
made with a resolution of *4 ms, which gives errors lower than 3% on jump
height and power. This is the basis of the app named MyJump which allow users to
measure accurately jumping performance in a few seconds by ﬁlming the feet on
the ground during a jump and then by just clicking on the screen to select the frames
corresponding to foot ground contact and take-off (Fig. 4.8). Besides to be vali-
dated to measure jump height (validation against force plate measurements,
Balsalobre-Fernandez et al. 2015), this app also compute force, velocity and power
variables to determine F-v relationship on the basis of the simple method presented
here.
4.5.2
Push-off Distance
The distance covered by the center of mass during the push off (hPO) can be easily
estimated (with the slight overestimation discussed in the method limit section) in
ﬁeld conditions through the hip vertical elevation corresponding to the leg length
change. The later can be determined before testing by the difference between the hip
(great trochanter or superior iliac crest) height in the crouch starting position
(Fig. 4.9) and the extended lower limb length with maximal foot plantar ﬂexion
(great trochanter/superior iliac crest to tiptoe distance, measured lying down on the
back, Fig. 4.10) which is the conﬁguration of lower limbs at take-off (Fig. 4.7).
This is a very convenient and simple method requiring only a measuring tape. The
86
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 91 -->
crouch starting position can be set at a given knee angle for all athletes (e.g. 90°, as
done during the validation protocol, Samozino et al. 2008) or letting athletes free to
choose their preferred starting position in order to maximize jump height. Then, the
starting position as to be standardized for all jumps to ensure that hPO corresponds
to the values determined a priori (Fig. 4.9). Note that the hPO was measured in this
way in the ﬁrst validation protocol of the simple method, and results showed very
low bias. Other techniques may be found to increase the precision of this parameter
and/or the easiness of use, as what we proposed for bench press in Chap. 7 which
could be adapted for jumping.
4.6
Practical Applications
The interest of such a simple method to determine F-v relationship is to be used
directly in typical training practice as a relatively simple routine test of the force,
velocity and power generating capacities of lower limb muscles. After a warm-up, a
Fig. 4.8 The iPhone app “Myjump” uses the high-speed video slow motion mode to measure the
aerial time of the jump, and thus compute jump height and all Force-velocity proﬁle variables
(some of whom will be presented in the next chapter)
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
87


<!-- Page 92 -->
good processing of the simple method makes possible to test 3 or 4 athletes in 30–
40 min. Here we will detail the different practical points of a typical testing session
using the simple method that contributes to the accuracy and the relevance of the
obtained data.
Warm-up. After 5–10 min of a typical general warm-up (e.g. running, cycling
or rowing), a speciﬁc warm-up has to include vertical jumps with a progressive
increase in the intensity and loaded jumps. Besides to complete warm-up, the latter
also aim at avoiding any apprehension of this kind of exercise and taking advantage
of a potential potentiation effect from the beginning of the tests. Note that if athletes
are not accustomed to loaded SJ and CMJ and/or to loaded squat exercises, an
accustomed session should be done some days before. The speciﬁc warm-up should
be used to check that athletes (i) perform vertical jumps without countermovement
if the tests focus on SJ and (ii) contact the ground at landing with an ankle plantar
ﬂexion if jump height is measured from ﬂight time.
Push-off distance measurement. Before, during or after warm-up, a mark has to
be put on great trochanter or superior iliac crest. In a practical point of view, a mark
on the superior iliac crest is easier to see during the testing session to standardize
the starting position. The extended lower limb length with maximal foot plantar
ﬂexion can be measured lying down on the back (Fig. 4.10). At the end of the
warm-up, the vertical height of the mark is measured when athlete is in the crouch
starting position for SJ or the crouch position corresponding to the beginning of the
ascendant phase for CMJ (Fig. 4.9). As previously mentioned, this position can be
ﬁxed or let free to the athletes (recommended). In the latter case, the choice of the
Fig. 4.9 Measurement of the starting height (hs) after warm-up and before jumping test for each
athlete (a) and using of this value to position each athlete in his own starting position before each
jumping trial (b)
88
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 93 -->
starting position can be done through different trials with and without loads. Note
that this choice is more relevant when performed after the warm-up than before.
Number and choice of loads. To determine a F-v relationship, several jumps
with different loads are required. A minimum of two different loads is necessary
(the two-load model recently proposed by Jaric 2016a), the maximum of loads
depending on fatigue occurrence. The lower the number of loads, the higher the
sensibility of the mechanical outputs to the potential measurement errors. So, we
recommended, notably during ﬁeld testing, to test 5 or 6 different loads including
the condition without load. The loads can be determined at given values relative to
body mass (Samozino et al. 2008), at given values relative to the one maximum
repetition in squat (Giroux et al. 2015) or at absolute values (Samozino et al. 2014).
Note that if several athletes are tested together in the same session, absolute values
of loads are easier to set up. The exact values of the load is not so important, the
idea is that the several loads cover the highest range of values as possible, the
lowest load being without additional load and the highest load being the highest
load with which the athlete can jump. For security and quality of movement exe-
cution, we advise to not test loads with which the athlete cannot jump higher than
*8 to 10 cm. In practice, the highest load is from *75% of body mass for athlete
non-accustomed to heavy strength training to *100% of body mass for others. The
number and choice of loads can be changed during testing considering the actual
jumping performance realized, for instance by adding a supplementary loading
condition if the athlete jump largely higher than 10 cm with the highest load or
slightly decreasing the highest load if an athlete does not feel to jump with it. The
different loads can be randomized.
Jumping tests. Each athlete has to perform at least two trials at each load, only
the best performance being considered for analysis. If performances are too much
different between the two trials, athlete should do another one to conﬁrm or inﬁrm
the best jump previously performed. An overestimation of the performance can be
due to a non-respect of the instructions: incorrect countermovement, feet too much
dorsiﬂexed at landing (if using ﬂight time) or important trunk extension during
push-off. All these criteria have to be carefully checked at each jump to be vali-
dated. The different trials at each load can be performed successively with 20–30 s
of rest between them. The different loading conditions can be separated by a 5-min
rest, period during which other athletes can be tested. For each trial, athlete set up
for the squat jump in a standing position while holding a barbell across their
shoulders for additional loads conditions or with arms crossed on torso for the
Fig. 4.10 Measurement of the lower limb length with maximal foot plantar ﬂexion, which
corresponds to the height of the hip at the instant of take-off during a vertical jump
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
89


<!-- Page 94 -->
no-load jump. For SJ, athlete are asked to bend their legs and reach the a priori
deﬁned starting height carefully checked thanks to a ruler and the mark on athlete
hip (Fig. 4.9). After having maintained this crouch position for about 2 s, they were
asked to apply force as fast as possible and to jump for maximum height. For CMJ,
athletes initiate a downward movement until the a priori deﬁned squatting position
followed immediately by a jump to maximum height. To control if the degree of
crouching squatting achieved is good, an elastic band can be extended just under
the athlete buttock at the height corresponding to the a priori deﬁned position. If the
athlete is too far from the elastic or if he/she touches too much it, the trial cannot be
validated.
Live feedback and adjustment quality of the F-v relationship. The accuracy
and reliability of the mechanical outputs (F0, v0, Pmax and F-v proﬁle) depend
directly on the adjustment quality of the F-v linear regression. If the different points
corresponding to the different loading conditions (best trials) are not well aligned as
expected, the obtained outputs make less sense. A good objective index of the
adjustment quality of the F-v relationship is the determination coefﬁcient (r2) which
should be higher than *0.95 when 5 or 6 loads (i.e. points on the F-v curve) are
used. In practice, it is interesting to have a feedback of the F-v relationship and its
adjustment quality in live during testing in order to ask athlete to do again a
condition in case of doubts (a point strangely above or below the linear F-v curve)
(Fig. 4.2). A simple spreadsheet including the different computations and F-v
relationship diagram allows athletes or coaches, after entering the individual inputs
data (hPO, and h and m for each condition), to have this kind of feedback and to
know the individual muscle capabilities directly at the end of the test.1 The
MyJump App makes also possible this kind of direct feedback.
4.7
Conclusion
This chapter present the F-v relationship as an interesting tool to evaluate the
different lower limb muscle mechanical capabilities during ballistic push-off:
maximal power and F-v proﬁle. This chapter also present an accurate and reliable
simple ﬁeld method to determine these muscle capabilities with a precision similar
to that obtained with speciﬁc laboratory ergometers, while being convenient for
ﬁeld use because the computations only require loaded jumps (accurately stan-
dardized and performed) and three parameters rather easily measurable out of
laboratory: body mass, jump height and push-off distance.
The use of this simple method as routine test gives interesting information to
coaches or physiotherapists: individual maximal power output and F-v proﬁle. This
1A typical spreadsheet and a tutorial to use it (home-made by Morin and Samozino) can be
downloaded/viewed
here:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320146284_JUMP_FVP_
proﬁle_spreadsheet
90
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 95 -->
makes possible the follow-up of athlete muscle capabilities during a season or over
several years, but also the comparison between athletes, which can help to optimize
training and individualize loads and exercise modalities in strength training.
As for all kind of tests, determining the strengths and the weaknesses of an
athlete based on the comparison with other athletes or with indexes thresholds
computed from other athlete data is limited, yet interesting if no other way to
interpret them. In order to optimize and individualize strength training, the idea
would be rather to compare each athlete data to the data he/she should present to
reach the best ballistic performance as possible. This will be addressed in the next
chapter.
References
Andrews GC (1983) Biomechanical measures of muscular effort. Med Sci Sports Exerc 15(3):
199–207
Argus CK, Gill ND, Keogh JW, Blazevich AJ, Hopkins WG (2011) Kinetic and training
comparisons between assisted, resisted, and free countermovement jumps. J Strength
Conditioning Res 25(8):2219–2227. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181f6b0f4
Arsac LM, Belli A, Lacour JR (1996) Muscle function during brief maximal exercise: accurate
measurements on a friction-loaded cycle ergometer. Eur J Appl Physiol 74(1–2):100–106
Asmussen E, Bonde-Petersen F (1974) Storage of elastic energy in skeletal muscles in man. Acta
Physiol Scand 91(3):385–392
Avis FJ, Hoving A, Toussaint HM (1985) A dynamometer for the measurement of force, velocity,
work and power during an explosive leg extension. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 54(2):
210–215
Bahamonde RE (2005) Power prediction equations. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37(3):521; discussion
521-522
Balsalobre-Fernandez C, Glaister M, Lockey RA (2015) The validity and reliability of an iPhone
app for measuring vertical jump performance. J Sports Sci 33(15):1574–1579. https://doi.org/
10.1080/02640414.2014.996184
Bassey EJ, Short AH (1990) A new method for measuring power output in a single leg extension:
feasibility, reliability and validity. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 60(5):385–390
Bobbert MF (2012) Why is the force-velocity relationship in leg press tasks quasi-linear rather
than hyperbolic? J Appl Physiol 112(12):1975–1983. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.
00787.2011
Bosco C (1992) La valutazione della forza con il test di Bosco [Strength assessment with the
Bosco’s Test]. In: Societa Sampa Sportiva, Roma, pp 56–57
Bosco C, Belli A, Astrua M, Tihanyi J, Pozzo R, Kellis S, Tsarpela O, Foti C, Manno R,
Tranquilli C (1995) A dynamometer for evaluation of dynamic muscle work. Eur J Appl
Physiol Occup Physiol 70(5):379–386
Bosco C, Komi PV (1979) Potentiation of the mechanical behavior of the human skeletal muscle
through prestretching. Acta Physiol Scand 106(4):467–472
Bosco C, Luhtanen P, Komi PV (1983) A simple method for measurement of mechanical power in
jumping. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 50(2):273–282
Canavan PK, Vescovi JD (2004) Evaluation of power prediction equations: peak vertical jumping
power in women. Med Sci Sports Exerc 36(9):1589–1593
Casartelli N, Muller R, Mafﬁuletti NA (2010) Validity and reliability of the Myotest
accelerometric system for the assessment of vertical jump height. J Strength Conditioning
Res 24(11):3186–3193. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181d8595c
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
91


<!-- Page 96 -->
Cavagna GA (1975) Force platforms as ergometers. J Appl Physiol 39(1):174–179
Comstock BA, Solomon-Hill G, Flanagan SD, Earp JE, Luk HY, Dobbins KA, Dunn-Lewis C,
Fragala MS, Ho JY, Hatﬁeld DL, Vingren JL, Denegar CR, Volek JS, Kupchak BR,
Maresh CM, Kraemer WJ (2011) Validity of the Myotest® in measuring force and power
production in the squat and bench press. J Strength Conditioning Res 25(8):2293–2297. https://
doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e318200b78c
Corcos DM, Chen CM, Quinn NP, McAuley J, Rothwell JC (1996) Strength in Parkinson’s
disease: relationship to rate of force generation and clinical status. Ann Neurol 39(1):79–88.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410390112
Cormie P, Deane R, McBride JM (2007a) Methodological concerns for determining power output
in the jump squat. J Strength Conditioning Res 21(2):424–430
Cormie P, McBride JM, McCaulley GO (2007b) Validation of power measurement techniques in
dynamic lower body resistance exercises. J Appl Biomech 23(2):103–118
Cormie P, McCaulley GO, McBride JM (2007c) Power versus strength-power jump squat training:
inﬂuence on the load-power relationship. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(6):996–1003
Cormie P, McCaulley GO, Triplett NT, McBride JM (2007d) Optimal loading for maximal power
output during lower-body resistance exercises. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(2):340–349
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2010a) Adaptations in athletic performance after ballistic
power versus strength training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42(8):1582–1598
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2010b) Inﬂuence of strength on magnitude and
mechanisms of adaptation to power training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42(8):1566–1581
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2011a) Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 1
—biological basis of maximal power production. Sports Med 41(1):17–38
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2011b) Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 2
—training considerations for improving maximal power production. Sports Med 41(2):
125–146
Cronin J, McNair PJ, Marshall RN (2001) Velocity speciﬁcity, combination training and sport
speciﬁc tasks. J Sci Med Sport 4(2):168–178
Cronin JB, Hing RD, McNair PJ (2004) Reliability and validity of a linear position transducer for
measuring jump performance. J Strength Conditioning Res 18(3):590–593. https://doi.org/10.
1519/1533-4287(2004)18<590:RAVOAL>2.0.CO;2
Cuk I, Markovic M, Nedeljkovic A, Ugarkovic D, Kukolj M, Jaric S (2014) Force-velocity
relationship of leg extensors obtained from loaded and unloaded vertical jumps. Eur J Appl
Physiol 114(8):1703–1714. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-014-2901-2
Davies CT, Rennie R (1968) Human power output. Nature 217(5130):770–771
Davies CT, Young K (1984) Effects of external loading on short term power output in children and
young male adults. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 52(3):351–354
Dorel S, Couturier A, Lacour JR, Vandewalle H, Hautier C, Hug F (2010) Force-velocity
relationship in cycling revisited: beneﬁt of two-dimensional pedal forces analysis. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 42(6):1174–1183. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181c91f35
Dorel S, Guilhem G, Couturier A, Hug F (2012) Adjustment of muscle coordination during an
all-out sprint cycling task. Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(11):2154–2164. https://doi.org/10.1249/
MSS.0b013e3182625423
Driss T, Vandewalle H, Quièvre J, Miller C, Monod H (2001) Effects of external loading on power
output in a squat jump on a force platform: a comparison between strength and power athletes
and sedentary individuals. J Sports Sci 19(2):99–105
Dugan EL, Doyle TLA, Humphries B, Hasson CJ, Newton RU (2004) Determining the optimal
load for jump squats: a review of methods and calculations. J Strength Conditioning Res 18
(3):668–674
Ferretti G, Gussoni M, Di Prampero PE, Cerretelli P (1987) Effects of exercise on maximal
instantaneous muscular power of humans. J Appl Physiol 62(6):2288–2294
Fox EL, Mathews DK (1974) Interval training: conditioning for sports and general ﬁtness. In:
Saunders WB (eds) Philadelphia, pp 257–258
92
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 97 -->
Giroux C, Rabita G, Chollet D, Guilhem G (2015) What is the best method for assessing lower
limb force-velocity relationship? Int J Sports Med 36(2):143–149. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-
0034-1385886
Giroux C, Rabita G, Chollet D, Guilhem G (2016) Optimal balance between force and velocity
differs among world-class athletes. J Appl Biomech 32(1):59–68. https://doi.org/10.1123/jab.
2015-0070
Glatthorn JF, Gouge S, Nussbaumer S, Stauffacher S, Impellizzeri FM, Mafﬁuletti NA (2011)
Validity and reliability of Optojump photoelectric cells for estimating vertical jump height.
J Strength Conditioning Res 25(2):556–560. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181ccb18d
Gray R, Start K, Glenross D (1962) A test of leg power. Res Q 33:44–50
Gülch RW (1994) Force-velocity relations in human skeletal muscle. Int J Sports Med 15(Suppl
1):S2–S10
Harman EA, Rosenstein MT, Frykman PN, Rosenstein RM (1990) The effects of arms and
countermovement on vertical jumping. Med Sci Sports Exerc 22(6):825–833
Harman EA, Rosenstein MT, Frykman PN, Rosenstein RM, Kraemer WJ (1991) Estimation of
human power output from vertical jump. J Appl Sport Sci Res 5(3):116–120
Harris NK, Cronin JB, Hopkins WG (2007) Power outputs of a machine squat-jump across a
spectrum of loads. J Strength Conditioning Res 21(4):1260–1264
Hill AV (1938) The heat of shortening and the dynamic constants of muscle. Proc R Soc Lond B
Biol Sci 126B:136–195
Hintzy F, Belli A, Grappe F, Rouillon JD (1999) Optimal pedalling velocity characteristics during
maximal and submaximal cycling in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 79(5):
426–432
Hopkins WG, Schabort EJ, Hawley JA (2001) Reliability of power in physical performance tests.
Sports Med 31(3):211–234
James RS, Navas CA, Herrel A (2007) How important are skeletal muscle mechanics in setting
limits on jumping performance? J Exp Biol 210(Pt 6):923–933
Janssen WG, Bussmann HB, Stam HJ (2002) Determinants of the sit-to-stand movement: a review.
Phys Ther 82(9):866–879
Jaric S (2015) Force-velocity relationship of muscles performing multi-joint maximum perfor-
mance tasks. Int J Sports Med 36(9):699–704. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0035-1547283
Jaric S (2016a) Two-load method for distinguishing between muscle force, velocity, and
power-producing capacities. Sports Med. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-016-0531-z
Jaric S (2016b) Two-load method for distinguishing between muscle force, velocity, and
power-producing capacities. Sports Med 46(11):1585–1589. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-
016-0531-z
Jaric S, Markovic G (2009) Leg muscles design: the maximum dynamic output hypothesis. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 41(4):780–787
Jimenez-Reyes
P,
Samozino
P,
Pareja-Blanco
F,
Conceicao
F,
Cuadrado-Penaﬁel
V,
Gonzalez-Badillo JJ, Morin JB (2016) Validity of a simple method for measuring
force-velocity-power proﬁle in countermovement jump. Int J Sports Physiol Perform. https://
doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2015-0484
Johnson DL, Bahamonde R (1996) Power output estimate in university athletes. J Strength
Conditioning Res 10(3):161–166
Kaneko M, Fuchimoto T, Toji H, Suei K (1983) Training effect of different loads on the
force-velocity relationship and mechanical power output in human muscle. Scand J Sports Sci
5(2):50–55
Kannus P (1994) Isokinetic evaluation of muscular performance: implications for muscle testing
and rehabilitation. Int J Sports Med 15(Suppl 1):S11–S18
Kawamori N, Rossi SJ, Justice BD, Haff EE, Pistilli EE, O’Bryant HS, Stone MH, Haff GG (2006)
Peak force and rate of force development during isometric and dynamic mid-thigh clean pulls
performed at various intensities. J Strength Conditioning Res 20(3):483–491. https://doi.org/
10.1519/18025.1
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
93


<!-- Page 98 -->
Lara AJ, Abian J, Alegre LM, Jimenez L, Aguado X (2006a) Assessment of power output in jump
tests for applicants to a sports sciences degree. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 46(3):419–424
Lara AJ, Alegre LM, Abian J, Jimenez L, Urena A, Aguado X (2006b) The selection of a method
for estimating power output from jump performance. J Hum Mov Stud 50:399–410
Lutz GJ, Rome LC (1994) Built for jumping: the design of the frog muscular system. Science
263(5145):370–372
Macaluso A, De Vito G (2003) Comparison between young and older women in explosive power
output and its determinants during a single leg-press action after optimisation of load. Eur J
Appl Physiol 90(5–6):458–463
Mak MK, Levin O, Mizrahi J, Hui-Chan CW (2003) Joint torques during sit-to-stand in healthy
subjects and people with Parkinson’s disease. Clin Biomech (Bristol, Avon) 18(3):197–206.
doi:S0268003302001912 [pii]
Marey JE, Demeny G (1885) Locomotion humaine, mécanisme du saut. Comptes rendus des
séances de l’Académies des Sciences; séance du 24 août 1885, vol 101. Institut de France,
Académies des Sciences, Paris
Margaria R, Aghemo P, Rovelli E (1966) Measurement of muscular power (anaerobic) in man.
J Appl Physiol 21(5):1662–1664
Markovic G, Vuk S, Jaric S (2011) Effects of jump training with negative versus positive loading
on jumping mechanics. Int J Sports Med 32:1–8
Marsh RL (1994) Jumping ability of anuran amphibians. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 38B:51–111
Martin JC, Wagner BM, Coyle EF (1997) Inertial-load method determines maximal cycling power
in a single exercise bout. Med Sci Sports Exerc 29(11):1505–1512
McBride JM, Triplett-McBride T, Davie A, Newton RU (2002) The effect of heavy- vs. light-load
jump squats on the development of strength, power, and speed. J Strength Conditioning Res
16(1):75–82
McCartney N, Heigenhauser GJ, Sargeant AJ, Jones NL (1983) A constant-velocity cycle
ergometer for the study of dynamic muscle function. J Appl Physiol 55(1 Pt 1):212–217
McCartney N, Obminski G, Heigenhauser GJ (1985) Torque-velocity relationship in isokinetic
cycling exercise. J Appl Physiol 58(5):1459–1462
McMaster DT, Gill N, Cronin J, McGuigan M (2014) A brief review of strength and ballistic
assessment methodologies in sport. Sports Med 44(5):603–623. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40279-014-0145-2
Morin JB, Samozino P, Bonnefoy R, Edouard P, Belli A (2010) Direct measurement of power
during one single sprint on treadmill. J Biomech 43(10):1970–1975
Morin JB, Samozino P (2016) Interpreting power-force-velocity proﬁles for individualized and
speciﬁc training. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 11(2):267–272
Padulo J, Migliaccio GM, Ardigo LP, Leban B, Cosso M, Samozino P (2017) Lower limb force,
velocity, power capabilities during leg press and squat movements. Int J Sports Med. http://doi.
org/10.1055/s-0043-118341
Palmieri G, Callegari M, Fioretti S (2015) Analytical and multibody modeling for the power
analysis of standing jumps. Comput Methods Biomech Biomed Engin 18(14):1564–1573.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10255842.2014.930135
Pearson SJ, Cobbold M, Harridge SD (2004) Power output of the lower limb during variable
inertial loading: a comparison between methods using single and repeated contractions. Eur J
Appl Physiol 92(1–2):176–181
Rabita G, Dorel S, Slawinski J, Saez de villarreal E, Couturier A, Samozino P, Morin JB (2015)
Sprint mechanics in world-class athletes: a new insight into the limits of human locomotion.
Scand J Med Sci Sports. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.12389
Rahmani A, Dalleau G, Viale F, Belli A, Lacour JR (1998) Mesure de la force dynamique par un
test ballistique. Science et Sports 13:241–242
Rahmani A, Dalleau G, Viale F, Hautier CA, Lacour JR (2000) Validity and reliability of a
kinematic device for measuring the force developed during squatting. J Appl Biomech 16:
26–35
94
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 99 -->
Rahmani A, Locatelli E, Lacour JR (2004) Differences in morphology and force/velocity
relationship between Senegalese and Italian sprinters. Eur J Appl Physiol 91(4):399–405
Rahmani A, Viale F, Dalleau G, Lacour JR (2001) Force/velocity and power/velocity relationships
in squat exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 84(3):227–232
Riviere JR, Rossi J, Jimenez-Reyes P, Morin JB, Samozino P (2017) Where does the
one-repetition maximum exist on the force-velocity relationship in squat? Int J Sports Med.
http://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-116670
Samozino P, Edouard P, Sangnier S, Brughelli M, Gimenez P, Morin JB (2014) Force-velocity
proﬁle: imbalance determination and effect on lower limb ballistic performance. Int J Sports
Med 35(6):505–510. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1354382
Samozino P, Horvais N, Hintzy F (2007) Why does power output decrease at high pedaling rates
during sprint cycling? Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(4):680–687
Samozino P, Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A (2008) A simple method for measuring force, velocity
and power output during squat jump. J Biomech 41(14):2940–2945
Samozino P, Rejc E, Di Prampero PE, Belli A, Morin JB (2012) Optimal force-velocity proﬁle in
ballistic movements. Altius: citius or fortius? Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(2):313–322
Sargeant AJ, Hoinville E, Young A (1981) Maximum leg force and power output during
short-term dynamic exercise. J Appl Physiol 51(5):1175–1182
Sargent LW (1924) Some observations on the Sargent test of neuromuscular efﬁciency. Am Phys
Educ Rev 29:47–56
Sayers SP, Harackiewicz DV, Harman EA, Frykman PN, Rosenstein MT (1999) Cross-validation
of three jump power equations. Med Sci Sports Exerc 31(4):572–577
Scholz MN, Bobbert MF, Knoek van Soest AJ (2006) Scaling and jumping: gravity loses grip on
small jumpers. J Theor Biol 240(4):554–561
Seck D, Vandewalle H, Decrops N, Monod H (1995) Maximal power and torque-velocity
relationship on a cycle ergometer during the acceleration phase of a single all-out exercise.
Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 70(2):161–168
Seo DI, Kim E, Fahs CA, Rossow L, Young K, Ferguson SL, Thiebaud R, Sherk VD,
Loenneke JP, Kim D, Lee MK, Choi KH, Bemben DA, Bemben MG, So WY (2012)
Reliability of the one-repetition maximum test based on muscle group and gender. J Sports Sci
Med 11(2):221–225
Shetty AB (2002) Estimation of leg power: a two-variable model. Sports Biomech 1(2):147–155
Suzuki S, Watanabe S, Homma S (1982) EMG activity and kinematics of human cycling
movements at different constant velocities. Brain Res 240(2):245–258
Thorstensson A, Grimby G, Karlsson J (1976) Force-velocity relations and ﬁber composition in
human knee extensor muscles. J Appl Physiol 40(1):12–16
Van Soest AJ, Bobbert MF, Van Ingen Schenau GJ (1994) A control strategy for the execution of
explosive movements from varying starting positions. J Neurophysiol 71(4):1390–1402
van Soest O, Casius LJ (2000) Which factors determine the optimal pedaling rate in sprint cycling?
Med Sci Sports Exerc 32(11):1927–1934
Vandewalle H, Peres G, Heller J, Panel J, Monod H (1987a) Force-velocity relationship and
maximal power on a cycle ergometer. Correlation with the height of a vertical jump. Eur J Appl
Physiol Occup Physiol 56(6):650–656
Vandewalle H, Peres G, Monod H (1987b) Standard anaerobic exercise tests. Sports Med 4(4):
268–289
Verdijk LB, van Loon L, Meijer K, Savelberg HH (2009) One-repetition maximum strength test
represents a valid means to assess leg strength in vivo in humans. J Sports Sci 27(1):59–68.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02640410802428089
Wilson GJ, Walshe AD, Fisher MR (1997) The development of an isokinetic squat device:
reliability and relationship to functional performance. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol
75(5):455–461
Wright GA, Pustina AA, Mikat RP, Kernozek TW (2012) Predicting lower body power from
vertical jump prediction equations for loaded jump squats at different intensities in men and
4
A Simple Method for Measuring Lower Limb Force, Velocity …
95


<!-- Page 100 -->
women. J Strength Conditioning Res 26(3):648–655. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013
e3182443125
Yamauchi J, Ishii N (2007) Relations between force-velocity characteristics of the knee-hip
extension movement and vertical jump performance. J Strength Conditioning Res 21(3):
703–709
Yamauchi J, Mishima C, Fujiwara M, Nakayama S, Ishii N (2007) Steady-state force-velocity
relation in human multi-joint movement determined with force clamp analysis. J Biomech
40(7):1433–1442
Yamauchi J, Mishima C, Nakayama S, Ishii N (2005) Torque-velocity relation of pedaling
movement against stepwise increase in load. Int J Sport Health Sci 3:110–115
Zamparo P, Antonutto G, Capelli C, di Prampero PE (2000) Effects of different after-loads and
knee angles on maximal explosive power of the lower limbs in humans. Eur J Appl Physiol
82(5–6):381–390
Zamparo P, Antonutto G, Capelli C, Girardis M, Sepulcri L, di Prampero PE (1997) Effects of
elastic recoil on maximal explosive power of the lower limbs. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup
Physiol 75(4):289–297
96
P. Samozino

