# Chapter 5: Optimal Force-Velocity Profile in Ballistic Push-off


<!-- Page 101 -->
Chapter 5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic
Push-off: Measurement and Relationship
with Performance
Pierre Samozino
Abstract Training or rehabilitation programs have to induce changes in force(F)-
velocity(v)-power(P) capabilities according to both mechanical demands of the
targeted task and actual athlete’s muscle capabilities. To determine individual
strengths and weaknesses and then individualize strength training modalities, it is
essential to know which mechanical capabilities lower limb muscles have to present
to maximize ballistic push-off performances. In this chapter, we explore the rela-
tionship between the different lower limb muscle mechanical capabilities and bal-
listic push-off performances. A biomechanical model is presented to bring new
insights on the effect of F-v proﬁle on ballistic performances, notably on the
existence of an optimal F-v proﬁle. The latter can be accurately determined for each
athlete using equations given in this chapter and usual squat jump FvP proﬁle
evaluations, including testing using the simple ﬁeld method presented in Chap. 4.
This makes possible the determination of F-v imbalance (towards force or velocity
capabilities) and the quantiﬁcation of the magnitude of the associated force or
velocity deﬁcits. These indexes constitute interesting tools to individualize athlete’s
training programs aiming to improve athletes’ ballistic performance. These indi-
vidual programs should focus on increasing lower limb maximal power and/or
decreasing force-velocity imbalance. The effectiveness of such an individualized
“optimized” training was shown to be greater than a traditional strength training
similar for all athletes. This supports the great interest for strength and conditioning
coaches, who aim to improve athlete’s ballistic performance, to evaluate FvP proﬁle
on each of their athlete and to consider F-v imbalance to design individually
training regimen.
P. Samozino (&)
Laboratoire Inter-universitaire de Biologie de la Motricité, Université de Savoie Mont Blanc,
Campus Scientiﬁque, 73000 Le Bourget du Lac, Chambéry, France
e-mail: pierre.samozino@univ-smb.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_5
97


<!-- Page 102 -->
5.1
Introduction
The previous chapter presents a simple method to evaluate power muscle capa-
bilities and F-v mechanical proﬁle of lower limbs during ballistic push-off in real
practice ﬁeld conditions (see Chap. 4 for more details on these concepts and
method). Training or rehabilitation programs have to induce changes in these
capabilities according to both mechanical demands of the targeted task and actual
athlete’s muscle capabilities. To use the simple jumping method to determine
individual strengths and weaknesses and then individualize strength training
modalities, it is essential to know which mechanical capabilities lower limb muscles
have to present to maximize ballistic push-off performance. Notably, one of the
main questions scientists, coaches, or athletes ask when exploring factors for
optimizing ballistic performance is which mechanical quality of the neuromuscular
system is more important: ‘‘force’’ or ‘‘velocity’’ mechanical capability?
Acyclic ballistic performances are determined by the capability to accelerate a
mass (its own body mass or an external mass) as much as possible to reach the
highest velocity at the end of a push-off, such a common limb extension. From
Newton’s second law of motion, the velocity reached by the body center of mass
(CM) at the end of a push-off (or take-off velocity) directly depends on the
mechanical impulse developed in the movement direction, i.e. the integration of the
force produced over the time (Winter 2005; McBride et al. 2010; Knudson 2009).
However, the ability to develop a high impulse cannot be considered as a
mechanical capabilities of the neuromuscular system: we cannot say that an athlete
presents a high mechanical impulse ability. The mechanical impulse is directly
associated to the movement/task constraints and not only to the individual prop-
erties. It is important to differentiate mechanical outputs characterizing the
movement/task (e.g. external force, movement velocity, power output, impulse,
mechanical work) from mechanical capabilities of the neuromuscular system which
represent the maximal limit of what the athlete muscles can produce. So, the issue is
to identify which mechanical muscle capability(ies) determine(s) the ability to
produce a high mechanical impulse.
Developing a high impulse during a lower or upper limb push-off, and in turn
accelerating a mass as much as possible, has often been assumed to depend on
muscle power capabilities (Vandewalle et al. 1987; James et al. 2007; Yamauchi
and Ishii 2007; Newton and Kraemer 1994; Frost et al. 2010; Samozino et al. 2008;
McBride et al. 2010). It is why many sports performance practitioners, interested in
ballistic performances, focus in improving muscular power (Cormie et al. 2011b;
Frost et al. 2010; Cronin and Sleivert 2005; McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al.
2011a). However, maximal power output may be improved by increasing the ability
to develop high levels of force at low velocities (henceforth called “force capa-
bilities” or “maximal strength”) and/or lower levels of force at high velocities
(henceforth called “velocity capabilities”) (McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al.
2011b; Cronin et al. 2001). One of the main issues for strength and conditioning
coaches is to determine where to place the training “cursor” within the continuum
98
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 103 -->
between these two extreme training modalities: maximal force and maximal
velocity strength training. Which are the muscle mechanical capabilities to train to
improve power capabilities and in turn ballistic performance at best?
In this chapter, we will explore the relationship between the different lower limb
muscle mechanical capabilities and ballistic push-off performances. First, this will
be studied from previous experimental data. Then, a biomechanical model will be
presented to bring new insights on the effect of F-v proﬁle on ballistic perfor-
mances, notably on the existence of an optimal F-v proﬁle. Experimental data and
practical applications and examples will be put forward to support this biome-
chanical model and its associated ﬁndings.
5.2
Force, Velocity, Power Capabilities & Performance
5.2.1
Performance and Maximal Power Output
As previously mentioned, ballistic push-off performances are often been explored
through maximal jumping performances. Jump height has mostly been related to
lower limb maximal power output (Pmax, Newton and Kraemer 1994), the latter
being measured during pedaling (Driss et al. 1998; Vandewalle et al. 1987; Hautier
et al. 1996), jumping (Samozino et al. 2014; McBride et al. 2010) or horizontal leg
press movement (Yamauchi and Ishii 2007). The high magnitudes and occurrences
of correlation between jump height and Pmax (from 0.65 to 0.87 when Pmax is
expressed relatively to body weight) well support the important inﬂuence of Pmax
on ballistic push-off performances (Fig. 5.1). Interestingly, the understanding of the
muscle properties determining jumping performance has also been extensively
studied in animals, as frogs or bushbabies, with a similar high relationship with
muscle power capabilities (James et al. 2007; Aerts 1998; Marsh 1994). This
explains the wide interest of sports performance practitioners in improving mus-
cular power (Cormie et al. 2011b; Frost et al. 2010; Cronin and Sleivert 2005;
McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al. 2011a).
However, although high and signiﬁcant, the correlations between Pmax and
jumping performances are not perfect and shows (interpreting the r2 values) that
only *40–80% of the differences in jumping performances between athletes can be
explained by differences in Pmax (Fig. 5.1). Even if a part of this non-explained
variability in jump height can be attributed to the speciﬁc experimental conditions
and to the inevitable measurement noise and variability, the potential effects of
others muscle qualities, as F-v proﬁle, cannot be ruled out. This was one of the
conclusions of the review of Cronin and Sleivert about the understanding of the
inﬂuence of maximal power training on improving athletic performance (Cronin
and Sleivert 2005): “power is only one aspect that affects performance and it is
quite likely that other strength measures may be equally if not more important for
determining the success of certain tasks”.
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
99


<!-- Page 104 -->
5.2.2
Performance and Force-velocity Mechanical Proﬁle
The effect of force and velocity lower limb capabilities on jumping performance is
controverted. Driss and colleagues showed a signiﬁcant correlation between jump
height and the maximal force (F0) normalized to athlete body mass (r = 0.67;
P < 0.01, Driss et al. 1998), this correlation being shown as non-signiﬁcant by
Yamauchi & Ishii (r = 0.24; P > 0.05, Yamauchi and Ishii 2007) (Fig. 5.1). These
contrasted results about the association between jumping performance and maximal
force capabilities (often evaluated through one maximum repetition tests) have been
previously reported and discussed (e.g. Ugrinowitsch et al. 2007; Young et al.
1999; Davis et al. 2003; Cormie et al. 2011b; Stone et al. 2002). Some studies show
the effect of force capabilities on jump height only when force is assessed at high
movement velocities and not maximal force values (Eckert 1968; Young et al.
1999; Genuario and Dolgener 1980). So, velocity capability also seems to affect
jumping performance, even if correlations with the maximal lower limb extension
velocity (v0) were shown to be signiﬁcant (r = 0.68; P < 0.001, Yamauchi and Ishii
2007) or not (r = 0.24; P > 0.05, Driss et al. 1998) (Fig. 5.1).
All these results do not give a clear view of the effects of lower limb force and
velocity capabilities on jumping performance, and even less of the effect of F-v
proﬁle (ratio between force and velocity capabilities, details in previous chapter).
Fig. 5.1 Correlations between jumping performance and maximal power, force and velocity
capabilities, the latter being obtained either during pedalling (from Driss et al 1998, on the top) or
leg press movement (from Yamauchi and Ishii 2007, on the bottom). Correlation and
determination coefﬁcients, number of subjects and correlation signiﬁcance are presented for each
relationship
100
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 105 -->
The previously mentioned relationships were tested through correlation analyses or
comparisons between athletes with different training backgrounds. This inevitably
presents potential interactions with covariant parameters, making thus uncertain the
causal link between each muscle capability and jumping performance. For instance,
a signiﬁcant association between maximal strength and jump height (Driss et al.
1998; Ugrinowitsch et al. 2007) may be due (or partly due) to the fact that, in the
athlete sample tested, the strongest athletes were also the most powerful, which is
likely possible since power is a combination of force and velocity capabilities. In
this case, the lower limb maximal force indirectly may affect jumping performance
only because it positively inﬂuences power capabilities. This is also true in studies
testing different training interventions on ballistic performances in which the var-
ious athletes F-v proﬁles were also associated with various Pmax values among
subjects, making it impossible to identify the sole effect of the F-v proﬁle (Cronin
et al. 2001; Harris et al. 2008; Cormie et al. 2007a, 2009, 2010, 2011b; McBride
et al. 2002).
So, such experimental analyses have often failed to inform us about the effect of
force and velocity capabilities on ballistic performances independently from the
well-known effect of Pmax. Otherwise, it is very difﬁcult to experimentally consider
or control all the parameters which can affect, together or independently, jumping
ability. This partly explains the previous contradictory results. For these reasons,
biomechanical models have been proposed to better understand the mechanical
factors affecting jumping performance.
5.2.3
Biomechanical Models Applied to Ballistic Push-off
The most famous biomechanical models applied to jumping performance are for-
ward simulation models that integrate a large amount of morphological, physio-
logical or neuromuscular variables (Alexander 1995; Bobbert and Van Soest 1994;
Pandy and Zajac 1991). These models have brought new insights about optimal
muscular coordination strategies or effects of different jumping techniques, what
could not have been shown experimentally (e.g. Pandy and Zajac 1991; Alexander
1995; Bobbert and Casius 2005). However, the numerous inputs used do not
represent the overall mechanical capabilities of the neuromuscular system, but
speciﬁc biological features (e.g. isolated muscle force and contraction velocity,
muscle activation dynamics or architecture) that affect these mechanical properties,
several of them acting on the same quality. So, they did not isolate the basic lower
limb mechanical capabilities determining jumping ability, which makes more dif-
ﬁcult the direct transfer to training applications. Other theoretical frameworks have
explored these overall mechanical characteristics affecting jumping ability through
the investigation of the mechanical requirements of maximal jumps. Indeed,
dynamics analyses of jumping allow one to identify the mechanical outputs of
push-off determining jumping performance at best. For instance, jumping perfor-
mance has been mathematically shown to be proportional to the mechanical work
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
101


<!-- Page 106 -->
produced during push-off (Emerson 1985; Alexander 2003) or to the mean power
developed before take-off (Marsh 1994; Minetti 2002). These models, based on
dynamics principles, showed that maximal jumping performances are determined
by the capability of lower limbs to produce mechanical work or power, but did not
identify which muscle capabilities, notably which F-v proﬁle, are associated with
such outputs.
In order to have a better understanding of the implication of the different lower
limb mechanical capabilities, and notably the F-v proﬁle, on ballistic push-off
performances, we used a biomechanical model only based on simple physical and
physiological principles applied to the athlete’s body CM during jumping.
5.3
An Optimal Force-Velocity Mechanical Proﬁle
During Jumping
5.3.1
Theoretical Bases and Equations
of the Biomechanical Model
During a ballistic movement, the mechanical outputs are the results of two different
mechanical constraints: the fundamental laws of dynamics and the mechanical
properties of the neuromuscular system. These two mechanical constraints affect
jumping performance through the interdependence of force production and move-
ment velocity.
Previous biomechanical models (e.g. Minetti 2002) have well shown the rela-
tionship between the external force applied to the body CM and other mechanical
outputs during a jump, notably movement velocity. For a given mass and lower
limb extension range, the higher the force produced onto the ground, the higher the
CM acceleration and in turn the CM velocity. This is the mechanical constraint
imposed by the movement dynamics, well synthesized by the second Newton’s law
of motion. So, to jump high, or to reach the highest velocity at the end of a push-off,
the athlete has to present high movement velocity. To do that, the athlete has thus to
develop the highest force as possible onto the ground. But, the higher the movement
velocity, the lower the athlete’s force production capability. This is the mechanical
constraint associated to the properties of the neuromuscular system well represented
through the F-v relationship: the higher the lower limb extension velocity, the lower
the maximal force that can be developed. Consequently, a maximal ballistic per-
formance is a “circular” interaction between these two mechanical constraints
which describe opposite relationships between external force and movement
velocity: increase in velocity when force applied increases (movement dynamics
constraints) and decrease in force produced when velocity increases (neuromuscular
constraints) (Samozino et al. 2010; Fig. 5.2). The highest ballistic push-off per-
formance an athlete can reach is thus achieved in the push-off condition respecting
these two mechanical constraints, and so corresponding to both muscle maximal
102
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 107 -->
capabilities and movement dynamics. The idea of the present biomechanical model
is to put this “circular” interaction into equations to express the athlete maximal
performance as a mathematical function of his/her muscle mechanical capabilities.
The biomechanical model is developed from an analysis of the dynamics of the
body CM during ballistic performance through maximal jumps at different push-off
angles. The entire lower limb neuromuscular system is considered as a force
generator characterized by an inverse linear F-v relationship (as described in
Chap. 4) and a given range of motion (hPO). The maximal ballistic performance (be
it during jumping or start sprinting) can be well represented by the maximal CM
velocity reached at the end of the push-off, i.e. at take-off (vTOmax), and can be
expressed as (for detailed computations, see Samozino et al. 2010, 2012):
vTOmax ¼ hPO
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
S2
Fv
4 þ
2
hPO

2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
Pmax  SFv
p
 g  sina


s
þ SFv
2
0
@
1
A
ð5:1Þ
when g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 m s−2), a the push-off angle with
respect to the horizontal (in deg), hPO the distance covered by the CM during
push-off corresponding to the extension range of lower limbs (in m), and SFv the F-v
mechanical proﬁle of lower limbs corresponding to the slope of the linear F-v
relationship (SFv = −F0/v0).
Fig. 5.2 Theoretical representation of the mechanical constraints imposed by movement
dynamics (solid line) and lower limb neuromuscular properties (dashed line) during a typical
vertical jump. The solid line represents the take-off velocity according to the force produced over
push-off. The force–velocity conditions (mean force produced and mean velocity over push-off)
allowed by lower limb mechanical capabilities are represented for sub maximal efforts (grey area)
and for all-out efforts (dashed line). Note that here, force and velocity axes are switched compared
to usual ﬁgures of force-velocity relationships presented elsewhere in this book, which does not
modify the curve interpretation. (From Samozino et al. 2010)
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
103


<!-- Page 108 -->
This equation does not aim to predict the performance of a given athlete knowing
his power capabilities and his F-v proﬁle (you have just to make him jump to have
this information). This equation help to better understand how the different lower
limb mechanical capabilities are involved in ballistic performance. First of all, it
shows that the maximal velocity an athlete can reach at the end of a ballistic push-off
depends directly on the inclination of the push-off and on lower limb maximal
power, F-v proﬁle and range of extension. Then, quantiﬁcation of the effect mag-
nitudes of each properties to performance can be obtained simulating this equation,
i.e. “playing” with the different variables one after the other. Before that
(Sect. 5.3.3), it is important to support the validity and the relevance of the proposed
biomechanical model comparing the equation predictions to experimental data.
5.3.2
Validation of the Model
The validity of the biomechanical model was tested by comparing performances
predicted by Eq. 5.1 based on mechanical properties measured on different athletes
to actual performances performed by the same athletes (Samozino et al. 2012).
Fourteen male athletes practicing physical activities including explosive efforts
(e.g. basket-ball, rugby, soccer) performed two series of maximal lower limb
push-offs: (i) horizontal extensions with different resistive forces allowing us to
determine lower limb F-v relationships; and (ii) inclined jumps used to compare
experimental performances to theoretical predictions. Tests were realized on the
Explosive Ergometer of the Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies
of the University of Udine which consists of a metal frame supporting one rail on
which a seat, ﬁxed on a carriage, was free to move (for more details, see Rejc et al.
2010; Samozino et al. 2012, Fig. 5.3). For each test, athletes were asked to push on
two force plates (LAUMAS PA 300, Parma, Italy) positioned perpendicular to the
rail to accelerate themselves and the carriage seat backward as fast as possible. The
velocity of the carriage seat along the rail was continuously recorded by a wire
tachometer (LIKA SGI, Vicenza, Italy). During the ﬁrst series of tests, athletes
performed horizontal maximal push-offs against 7 different resistive forces (from 0
to 240% of body weight) to determine individual F-v and P-v relationships and
associated Pmax, SFv and hPO values. For each athlete, the latter values were used as
input in the Eq. 5.1 to compute the maximal velocities (vTOmax) he could reach at
the end of push-offs inclined at different angles from the horizontal (10, 20 and
30°). These theoretical predicted values were compared to the actual take-off
velocities measured during the second series of tests consisting of inclined (10, 20
and 30°) jumps performed as fast as possible. Results showed no signiﬁcant dif-
ference between actual and predicted values with low absolute errors from 4 to
6.6% between both (Table 5.1). This supports the validity of the biomechanical
model and the associated Eq. 5.1, which allowed us to use it for simulations to
explore how the different mechanical variables, and notably F-v proﬁle, affects
ballistic performance.
104
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 109 -->
5.3.3
Muscular Capabilities Determining Jumping
Performance
The interest of such a model and equation is to isolate the effect of each factor from
the others, which is very difﬁcult, if not impossible, to do experimentally (Samozino
et al. 2012). The lower limb extension range (hPO) corresponds to the optimal or
usual one for each athlete, and so depends on individual intrinsic morphological or
biological features. Its effect on performance is not of great interest for training
purposes, it was kept constant here for the different model simulations, but the
following results were the same whatever the hPO values.
The ﬁrst result was the large effect of Pmax on ballistic performance with the
greatest weight among all the other muscular capabilities. This conﬁrms all the
previous experimental data showing a signiﬁcant (but not perfect) correlation
Fig. 5.3 Schematic view of the Explosive Ergometer (EXER). The rail can be tilted upward. To
allow the motor to act on the seat without delays, a constant tension (weight = 196 N) is applied to
the steel chain (dotted line). (From Samozino et al. 2012)
Table 5.1 Mean ± SD
of
take-off
velocity
obtained
with
experimental
and
theoretical
approaches, absolute bias between these two approaches, and t-test comparison results (from
Samozino et al 2012)
Push-off angle
(°)
Experimental values
(m s−1)
Theoretical values
(m s−1)
t-
test
Absolute Bias
(%)
10
2.45 ± 0.22
2.43 ± 0.18
ns
4.40 ± 4.94
20
2.32 ± 0.25
2.25 ± 0.16
ns
6.56 ± 5.46
30
2.14 ± 0.23
2.07 ± 0.15
ns
5.73 ± 3.89
ns Non signiﬁcative difference between experimental and theoretical values
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
105


<!-- Page 110 -->
between lower limb Pmax and jumping ability (see Sect. 5.2.1). This supports the
fact that the ability to develop a high impulse against the ground, and in turn the
ability to reach maximal CM velocity at the end of a push-off, is highly related to
the maximal power the lower limbs can produce (over a given extension range).
However, the main ﬁnding was not here the well-known positive effect of Pmax,
but was rather to show that power capabilities is not the only muscular properties
involved in jumping performance. Two athletes with the same Pmax (and the same
hPO) can achieve different velocities at the end of a vertical or horizontal push-offs.
These differences are due to their respective F-v proﬁles (SFv), i.e. to their respective
ratios between maximal force (F0) and velocity (v0) capabilities. Indeed, for a given
Pmax, vTOmax changes as a function of the F-v proﬁle in a curvilinear shape, with a
maximum value reached for an optimal F-v proﬁle (SFvopt, Fig. 5.4), the latter
corresponding to the best balance between maximal force and velocity capabilities.
The more this F-v proﬁle differs from the optimal one, the lower the performance in
comparison to the one that could be reached with the same power capabilities.
Consequently, the jumping performances of the two above-mentioned athletes
presenting the same power capabilities can be 30% different only due to a pro-
nounced unfavorable F-v proﬁle for one of them (Fig. 5.4). The optimal F-v proﬁle
is individual since it depends on Pmax and hPO individual values. It can be accu-
rately determined for each athlete using the following equation representing the real
solution cancelling out the ﬁrst mathematical derivative of Eq. 5.1 with respect to
SFv (more details in (Samozino et al. 2012)):
Fig. 5.4 Changes in maximal jumping performance that can be reached by an athlete as a function
of the changes in the force-velocity proﬁle (slope of the F-v relationship) for a given maximal
power values. The black point represents the highest performance that can be reached for an
optimal F-v proﬁle. Considering actual human values of F-v proﬁle, an unfavourable proﬁle can
lead to loss of performance until 30%, while maximal power is similar. (From Samozino et al.
2012)
106
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 111 -->
SFvopt ¼  ðg  sinaÞ2
3Pmax

 ðg  sinaÞ4


 h4
PO  12g  sina  h3
PO  P2
max


3h2
PO  Pmax  Z Pmax; hPO
ð
Þ
þ Z Pmax; hPO
ð
Þ
3h2
PO  Pmax
ð5:2Þ
with
Z Pmax; hPO
ð
Þ ¼

g  sina
ð
Þ6


 h6
PO  18 g  sina
ð
Þ3h5
PO  P2
max  54h4
PO  P4
max

þ 6
ﬃﬃ
3
p

ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2 g  sina
ð
Þ3h9
PO  P6
max þ 27h8
PO  P8
max
q
1=3
ð5:3Þ
These formulae can appear a little bit complicated, but remain easy to use in a
spreadsheet, a typical spreadsheet and a tutorial to use it (home-made by Morin and
Samozino) can bedownloaded/viewed here: https://www.researchgate.net/publi
cation/320146284_JUMP_FVP_proﬁle_spreadsheet. Note that complete computa-
tions of the individual optimal proﬁle, and subsequent indexes (see below), are
proposed in the smartphone application MyJump concomitantly to the determination
of the maximal power output and the F-v proﬁle (see Sect. 4.5.1 in Chap. 4).
The optimal F-v proﬁle also depends on push-off angle (a in Eqs. 5.1–5.3), and
more generally on the magnitude of the gravity component opposing motion: the
lower the push-off angle, the more the optimal F-v proﬁle is oriented towards
velocity capabilities. If you are a strength and conditioning coach of volley ball
players and you want to improve their vertical jump height (a = 90°), the optimal
F-v proﬁle will be more oriented towards force qualities than if you aim to increase
the change in velocity during the ﬁrst steps of a track and ﬁeld sprinter or a team
sport player (a  30–40°), and still more than if you focus on the diving push off of
a swimmer (a  0° or negative) (Fig. 5.5).
Whatever the kind of push-off, the individual F-v proﬁle can then be expressed
relatively to the optimal one (SFv%, in percentage) to underline the unfavorable
balance between force and velocity capabilities:
SFv% ¼
SFv
SFvopt  100
ð5:4Þ
A SFv% value higher than 100% represents a F-v proﬁle too much oriented
towards force capabilities, and in turn correspond to a velocity deﬁcit. In contrast, a
SFv% value lower than 100% is associated to a F-v proﬁle rather oriented to velocity
qualities with a force deﬁcit.
These ﬁnding support that the F-v proﬁle, and its comparison to the optimal one,
represents a muscular quality that has to be considered attentively by scientists
working on muscle function during maximal efforts, but also by coaches for
training purposes.
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
107


<!-- Page 112 -->
5.3.4
FV Imbalance & Performance
The above-mentioned results are “only” based on theoretical simulations of a
biomechanical model, it was in turn important to bring experimental evidence of the
effect of F-v proﬁle on ballistic performance. Does the magnitude of F-v imbalance
actually affect negatively ballistic performances independently from the effect of
power capabilities?
To answer to this question, F-v relationships and Pmax were determined on forty
eight high-level athletes (soccer players, sprinters, rugbymen) who performed
maximal squat jumps with additional loads from 0 to 100% of body mass and using
the simple ﬁeld method presented in the previous section (complete details on this
study in Samozino et al. 2014). For each athlete, F-v imbalance (FvIMB) was
computed as the normalized difference between actual and optimal F-v proﬁle as:
FvIMB ¼ 100  1 
SFv
SFvopt


ð5:5Þ
A multiple regression analysis showed that, when considered together, each of
the three predictor variables Pmax, FvIMB and hPO accounted for a signiﬁcant amount
of jumping performance variability (P < 0.001). The negative effect of FvIMB on
jumping performance put forward that, even if Pmax remains the main determinant
in ballistic performance, a F-v imbalance is associated to a lower performance. This
is an experimental support for (i) the inﬂuence of the normalized F-v proﬁle
(characterized by the slope of the F-v relationship, SFv) on jumping performance
Fig. 5.5 Changes in optimal force-velocity proﬁle as a function of the push-off angle for a given
maximal power output and push-off distance. In each sport activity, athletes mainly perform
push-offs at speciﬁc push-off angles, as here in swimming diving, horizontal sprint starting (track
and ﬁeld, team sport) or volley ball. (From Samozino et al. 2012)
108
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 113 -->
independently from the large effect of Pmax, and (ii) the existence of an optimal F-v
proﬁle maximizing performance for each individual.
The negative effect of the F-v imbalance on performance was quantiﬁed for each
athlete through the difference between their actual jump height reached during
unloaded condition and the maximal height they would have reached if they pre-
sented the same Pmax with an optimal F-v proﬁle. This hypothetic maximal jump
each athlete could reach with an optimal F-v proﬁle (hmax, in m) was computed
from his actual Pmax and hPO values and using the following equation derived from
the previously validated biomechanical model (Samozino et al. 2010, 2012):
hmax ¼ h2
PO
2g
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
SFvopt2
4
þ
2
hPO
ð2
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
PmaxSFvopt
p
 gÞ
s
þ SFvopt
2
 
!2
ð5:6Þ
Figure 5.6 presents the jump height actually reached by each athlete relatively to
their respective hmax according to the individual F-v proﬁle normalized to SFvopt
(SFv%). This shows the loss of performance due to the F-v imbalance illustrated here
by the grey area. Athletes presenting a F-v proﬁle close to the optimal one can jump
to the maximal performance associated to their power capabilities, the others could
not. The higher FvIMB, the higher the loss of performance. The individual loss of
performance due to the F-v imbalance ranged from 0% for subjects presenting
optimal proﬁles to *30% for one rugby player who exceptionally presented a
FvIMB of *250% (Fig. 5.6). This is in line with the above-mentioned theoretical
simulation. In fact, an athlete presenting a F-v imbalance (as computed here from
SFvopt maximizing vertical jumps) means that he does not develop his Pmax against
his body mass during a vertical jump, and so he does not make the most of his
power capabilities during ballistic movement performed at body weight (Samozino
et al. 2012). This is associated to the question of the optimal load maximizing
Fig. 5.6 Actual jump height reached in unloaded condition (jumping performance expressed
relatively to maximal performance athlete could reach if he presented an optimal F-v proﬁle)
according to F-v proﬁle (expressed relatively to their personal F-v optimal proﬁle). Each circle
represents a subject. The solid line represents theoretical changes predicted by the biomechanical
model. The grey area represents the individual loss of performance due to the F-v imbalance and
ranging from 0 for subjects presenting optimal proﬁle to *30% for the rugby player represented
by the circle on the extreme right of the ﬁgure. (From Samozino et al. 2014)
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
109


<!-- Page 114 -->
power production during ballistic movement (Jaric and Markovic 2009). The
optimal load for an athlete presenting an optimal F-v proﬁle for vertical jumps is his
own body mass. However, an athlete with a “force” proﬁle (i.e. with a “velocity”
deﬁcit), as most of the rugby players tested in this study, developed their Pmax
during vertical jumps against loads higher than their body mass (i.e. for additional
loads from 25 to 100% of their body mass). Note that this is not necessarily an issue
if ballistic performance at body weight is not the primary quality to optimize for
such players to who it may have been asked (for some of them) to be efﬁcient
against resistance (e.g., for forward players). At the opposite, the optimal load for
an athlete with a “velocity” proﬁle is lower than his body mass, and so he needs
unloaded conditions to develop his Pmax. The large range of F-v imbalance
observed in this study support the recently proposed and debated inﬂuence of
training history on the optimal load-maximizing power during vertical jumps (Jaric
and Markovic 2009; Markovic and Jaric 2007; Nuzzo et al. 2011; Pazin et al. 2011,
2013).
These data well supported the theoretical ﬁndings brought out by the biome-
chanical model on squat jump movements. However, squat jumps, involving just a
sole concentric action, does not occur very frequently in many sport activities in
which movements with successive eccentric and concentric muscle actions (e.g.
sprint running, jumps, changes of direction) are more usual. This is why counter
movement jumps (CMJ) remain the most commonly used task in sports training and
testing. Even if nothing could challenge the transfer to CMJ of the theoretical and
experimental results showed in SJ, the same protocol as described above was
conducted on CMJ (Jimenez-Reyes et al. 2014). As in SJ, CMJ performance was
shown to depend on F-v imbalance, independently from the effect of Pmax, with the
existence of an individual optimal F-v proﬁle, the negative effect of FvIMB being
even larger in CMJ. Moreover, this study clearly showed that the linear F-v rela-
tionship in CMJ was shifted to the right in comparison to SJ, with a larger shift in
F0 than in v0, and in turn a higher Pmax which explained the increase in CMJ
maximal height compared to SJ.
5.4
Practical Applications
5.4.1
F-v Proﬁle & F-v Imbalance Indices
Testing F-v proﬁles when aiming to identify the optimal balance between force and
velocity capabilities may be of interest to set training loads and programs, as
previously proposed using power-load relationships (Cormie et al. 2011b; Sheppard
et al. 2008; Jaric and Markovic 2009; McBride et al. 2002). F-v proﬁle individual
values allow comparisons among athletes independently from their power capa-
bilities, which is not possible from only F0 and v0 values. This makes possible to
compare different athletes and to know whether an individual is characterized by a
110
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 115 -->
“force” or a “velocity” proﬁle compared to another one (Figs. 4.3 and 5.7). Only
Carmelo Bosco proposed in the nineties an index to compare athletes’ F-v proﬁles
through the ratio between jump height reached with an additional load (100% of
body mass) and unloaded jump height (Bosco 1992). The higher this index, the
higher the force capabilities compared to velocity ones. However, Bosco’s index
does not allow the orientation of training loads for a given athlete according to his/
her own strengths and weaknesses and to movement speciﬁcities. This is why the
individual value of SFv, expressed relatively to SFvopt (SFv%), is a good and practical
index to characterize F-v proﬁle and to design appropriate training programs. The
difference between SFv% and 100% (i.e. FvIMBÞ allows the quantiﬁcation of the
magnitude of force or velocity deﬁcits. Consequently, SFv% and FvIMB values should
be individually determined when testing Force-velocity-Power (FvP) proﬁle, using
the simple ﬁeld method proposed in the previous chapter or other methods. This can
be easily done using a simple homemade spreadsheet or program writing, or even
easier using MyJump application which automatically computes these indexes in
addition to measure FvP proﬁle variables (see previous chapter).
Beyond to bring new insights into the understanding of the relationship between
mechanical function of the lower limbs neuromuscular system and maximal human
performances, the interest of the FvP proﬁle approach, including the optimal proﬁle,
is that it allows for a more individualized athlete’s evaluation, monitoring and
training practices. When a training program is designed to improve athletes’ bal-
listic push-off performance (e.g. jumps, single maximal push-offs, change of
direction), the focus should be placed on increasing Pmax and/or decreasing FvIMB.
With regards to athletes displaying signiﬁcant imbalance in mechanical capacities,
training programs should prioritize training the lacking mechanical capability, in
Fig. 5.7 Force-velocity proﬁles of 2 track and ﬁeld athletes obtained from maximal loaded squat
jumps (SJ). Despite a higher maximal power output (Pmax) value, athlete #1’s SJ performance is
lower because his FvIMB (magnitude of the relative difference between the slope of the linear
force-velocity relationship and the optimal slope) is greater than for athlete #2. For athlete #1, the
black line indicates the actual proﬁle, and the dashed line, the optimal proﬁle. Note that athlete
#2’s proﬁle if almost optimal, and therefore the actual and optimal relationships are confounded in
the right panel (gray line and black dashed line). (From Morin and Samozino 2016)
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
111


<!-- Page 116 -->
order to shift SFv towards SFvopt. Here we will present different data supporting the
great interest to consider F-v proﬁle, notably F-v imbalance, to design training
program focused on ballistic performances.
5.4.2
FV Imbalance & Case Reports
The importance of F-v proﬁle in ballistic performance can be well illustrated with
data from two track and ﬁeld athletes (#1 and #2) with similar lower limb extension
ranges but different Pmax and SFv (Fig. 5.7, Morin and Samozino 2016). Athlete #1
has a higher Pmax, but he presents a F-v imbalance (about 50% towards a force
deﬁcit) while athlete #2 has an optimal F-v proﬁle (only a negligible 1% imbal-
ance). This results to a higher squat jump performance for athlete #2. The present
approach would thus suggest, for athlete #1, a training program focusing in priority
the development of maximal force capabilities in order to both correct his imbal-
ance and increase Pmax. Once this goal is achieved, he may transition into similar
training to athlete #2, in order to improve his Pmax, while maintaining his corrected
(i.e. optimal) proﬁle.
Another obvious illustration of the signiﬁcance of F-v proﬁle is the comparison
of muscle mechanical capabilities and performance of two young players (#3 and
#4, Fig. 5.8) from the same soccer team (French ﬁrst league professional club
Fig. 5.8 Force-velocity proﬁles of 2 elite young (under-19) soccer players obtained from maximal
loaded squat jumps (SJ). Player#4 (a goalkeeper) has a force deﬁcit (magnitude of the relative
difference between the slope of the linear force-velocity relationship and the optimal slope—
FvIMB—of 72%), whereas Player#3 (a central defender) has a velocity deﬁcit (FvIMB of 137%).
(From Morin and Samozino 2016)
112
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 117 -->
academy U19). They have similar Pmax and SFvopt values, but present opposing
FvIMB characteristics. Player #3 displays a velocity deﬁcit, while player#4 shows a
force deﬁcit, but with an absolute difference with his own SFvopt lower than for
player#3 (28% versus 37%). This relatively smaller FvIMB and the slightly higher
Pmax in player#4 explain his higher squat jump performance. Knowing these dis-
crepancies in F-v proﬁle between these two players, the most efﬁcient way to train
and improve ballistic push-off performance in both of them would be an individ-
ualized program (indexed on each player’s FvIMB) that targets the development of
totally different capabilities.
5.4.3
FV Proﬁle and Training
As brieﬂy mentioned in the Chap. 4 (Sect. 4.2.2), the F-v proﬁle is sensible to the
kind of strength training performed (Cormie et al. 2010), which is of great interest
for sport practitioners, but most importantly a prerequisite to individually correct
F-v imbalance in order to maximize ballistic performances. Whatever the initial
athlete’s F-v proﬁle, training should be ideally designed to both increase Pmax and
decreasing FvIMB:
For athletes presenting a force deﬁcit, training should aim to increase force
capabilities (F0) as a priority (Samozino et al. 2012). The effectiveness of heavy
strength training, involving the use of high loads (>70% RM) in order to achieve
the maximal neuromuscular adaptations in periods ranging from 6 to 12 weeks, to
speciﬁcally increase maximal force capabilities has been clearly shown (Cormie
et al. 2007a, 2010; McBride et al. 2002). They result in improvements in maximal
strength parameters, as the well-known one repetition maximum (1RM) load.
Contrastingly, for athletes presenting a velocity deﬁcit, training should focus in
increasing Pmax by improving maximal velocity capabilities, i.e. the capacity to
produce force at very high contraction velocities. This can be achieved using
maximal velocity efforts during high accelerated movements with minimal or null
braking phase. Different training modalities have been proposed to increase
movement velocity: maximal effort removing deceleration phase at the end of the
movement (with bar throw or jump, Frost et al. 2010) using low loads (<30% of the
repetition maximum, Cormie et al. 2010), negative loads (Argus et al. 2011;
Markovic et al. 2011) or only inertia (Djuric et al. 2016). Plyometric contraction
mode can also been used to increase the contraction velocity during the concentric
phase of the movement. This type of training -commonly referred to as ballistic—
may result in a training-induced shift in force-time curves and force-velocity
relationships towards more velocity-related capabilities (Djuric et al. 2016).
Finally, for athletes presenting low or no deﬁcit, i.e. with an actual F-v proﬁle
close to the optimal one, the training program should target a balanced combination
of force, velocity and power in order to shift the entire F-v relationship to the top
and right. This would increase Pmax as a priority (e.g. Cormie et al. 2007b;
Kotzamanidis et al. 2005; McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al. 2011b) while
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
113


<!-- Page 118 -->
maintaining the F-v proﬁle close to the optimal value (and thus FvIMB close to 0%).
The effects of studies aiming to both increase maximal power and shift the entire
F-v curve show how combining a wide range of loads (heavy, optimal and low
loads) is an appropriate stimulus (Cormie et al. 2007b; Kotzamanidis et al. 2005;
McBride et al. 2002; Cormie et al. 2011b; Kaneko et al. 1983).
5.4.4
FV Imbalance, “Optimized” Training & Performance
The previous section shows that the sensitivity of the F-v proﬁle to speciﬁc training
programs can result in either maximal force or velocity capabilities improvements.
Most often, these speciﬁc training prescriptions are proposed similarly for all ath-
letes, sometimes considering the mechanical requirements of the tasks involved in a
given sport activity, but rarely (if not never) considering the initial F-v proﬁle, and
so the needs, of each individual. This results in contrasting ﬁndings, as to the effects
on jumping performance (e.g. Chelly et al. 2009; Cormie et al. 2007a, 2010;
McBride et al. 2002; Kotzamanidis et al. 2005), likely because of the various levels
and F-v characteristics of the populations tested. Indeed, a training program leading
to improve Pmax while increasing FvIMB could result in a lack of change, or even a
decrease in jumping performance.
In light of the above-mentioned points, we can thus reasonably assume that
speciﬁc strength training aiming at improving ballistic performance should be
designed on an individual basis to both reduce FvIMB (i.e. to increase preferably the
F0 or v0 component of an individual’s F-v proﬁle and shift it towards his optimal
proﬁle) and increase Pmax. This can been termed “optimized training” or “indi-
vidualized training based on FvIMB”. A recent study aimed at experimentally testing
and quantifying the effectiveness of such a training on ballistic performance
compared to a traditional resistance training common to all subjects and designed
without taking account of individual FvIMB (Jimenez-Reyes et al. 2016). Eighty four
subjects were assigned to three training intervention groups based on their initial
FvIMB:
an
optimized
group
divided
into
velocity-deﬁcit,
force-deﬁcit
and
well-balanced sub-groups based on subjects’ FvIMB, a “non-optimized” group for
which the training program was not speciﬁcally based on FvIMB and a control group
(without training). All subjects underwent a 9-week speciﬁc resistance training
program before and after which F-v proﬁle, FvIMB, Pmax and maximal vertical jump
height (used here as the index of performance since it represents the archetype of
ballistic movements) were tested. The programs were designed to reduce FvIMB for
the optimized groups (with speciﬁc strength training regimen for sub-groups formed
depending on individual FvIMB values), while the non-optimized group followed a
classical program exactly similar for all subjects targeting a balanced combination
of force, velocity and power qualities. During training, the force-deﬁcit sub-group
performed mainly force-oriented training (using very high loads >80% of 1RM),
while the velocity-deﬁcit sub-group performed velocity-oriented (ballistic, unloa-
ded and band assisted SJ or horizontal assisted roller push-off) training. The
114
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 119 -->
well-balanced sub-group followed a training program
covering
the
entire
force-velocity spectrum in equal proportions: heavy loads, power and ballistic
training. All the subjects of the “non-optimized” training group followed the latter
kind of training, independently from each subject’s FvIMB.
All subjects in the three optimized training sub-groups (velocity-deﬁcit,
force-deﬁcit and well-balanced) increased their jumping performance (very likely to
most likely very large effects of +7.2 to +14.2% on average) with jump height
improvement for all subjects, whereas the results were much more variable and
unclear in the non-optimized and control groups (trivial change of +2.3% on
average, 10 subjects out of 18 improved) (Fig. 5.9). This greater change in jump
height was associated with a markedly reduced FvIMB for both force-deﬁcit
(57.9 ± 34.7% decrease in FvIMB) and velocity-deﬁcit (20.1 ± 4.3% decrease in
FvIMB) subjects, and unclear or small changes in Pmax (−0.40 ± 8.4% and
+10.5 ± 5.2%, respectively). Both non-optimized and control groups presented
trivial change in FvIMB, Pmax and jumping performance.
These results clearly showed that an optimized and individualized training
program speciﬁcally addressing the F-v imbalance is more efﬁcient for improving
jumping performance than a traditional resistance training common to all subjects
regardless of their force-velocity imbalance and optimal force-velocity proﬁle
(Fig. 5.9). Most of the jumping performance improvements were associated to
reduce F-v imbalance with little or no change in Pmax. Normalized F-v proﬁle and
FvIMB could therefore be considered as a potentially useful variables for prescribing
optimal resistance training to improve ballistic performances. These experimental
results conﬁrmed the theoretical principles of the optimized training approach
(Morin and Samozino 2016; Samozino et al. 2012, 2014) that ballistic performance
depends not only on maximal power output, but also on an optimal force-velocity
proﬁle (Jimenez-Reyes et al. 2016).
5.5
Conclusion
This chapter presents the implication of lower limb muscle mechanical capabilities
in ballistic push-off performances. Biomechanical model simulations and experi-
mental data showed that ballistic performances (e.g. jump, sprint start, change of
direction) depend on both lower limb maximal power capabilities and F-v proﬁle,
with the existence of an individual optimal F-v proﬁle. The latter can be accurately
determined for each athlete using equations given in this chapter and usual squat
jump power-force-velocity proﬁle evaluations, including testing using the simple
ﬁeld method presented in the previous chapter. This makes possible the determi-
nation of F-v imbalance (towards force or velocity capabilities) and the quantiﬁ-
cation of the magnitude of the associated force or velocity deﬁcits. These indexes
constitute interesting tools to individualize athlete’s training program aiming to
improve athletes’ ballistic performance. These individual programs should focus on
increasing lower limb maximal power and/or decreasing force-velocity imbalance.
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
115


<!-- Page 120 -->
Fig. 5.9 Mean ± standard deviation of pre-post training changes in Force-velocity (F-v) proﬁle,
maximal power output and jumping performance for the intervention (ﬁlled symbols and black
continuous lines), non-optimized (black points and dashed lines) and control (grey points and
lines) groups. The intervention group is divided in three subgroups: the force-deﬁcit group (ﬁlled
diamonds), the velocity-deﬁcit group (ﬁlled circles) and the well-balanced group (ﬁlled squares).
The magnitude-based inference changes are presented on the right. The short-dashed line on the
top panel represents the optimal force-velocity proﬁle. (From Jimenez-Reyes et al. 2016)
116
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 121 -->
The effectiveness of such an individualized “optimized” training was shown to be
higher than a traditional strength training similar for all athletes. This support the
great interest for strength and conditioning coaches, who aim to improve athlete’s
ballistic performance, to evaluate power-force-velocity proﬁle on each of their
athlete and to consider force-velocity imbalance to design individually training
regimen.
References
Aerts P (1998) Vertical jumping in galago senegalensis: the quest for an obligate mechanical
power ampliﬁer. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 353:1607–1620
Alexander RM (1995) Leg design and jumping technique for humans, other vertebrates and
insects. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 347(1321):235–248
Alexander RM (2003) Climbing and jumping. In: Principles of animal locomotion. Princeton
University Press, pp 146–165
Argus CK, Gill ND, Keogh JW, Blazevich AJ, Hopkins WG (2011) Kinetic and training
comparisons between assisted, resisted, and free countermovement jumps. J Strength Cond Res
25(8):2219–2227. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181f6b0f4
Bobbert MF, Casius LJ (2005) Is the effect of a countermovement on jump height due to active
state development? Med Sci Sports Exerc 37(3):440–446
Bobbert MF, Van Soest AJ (1994) Effects of muscle strengthening on vertical jump height: a
simulation study. Med Sci Sports Exerc 26(8):1012–1020
Bosco C (1992) La valutazione della forza con il test di Bosco [Strength assessment with the
Bosco’s Test]. In: Societa Sampa Sportiva, Roma, pp 56–57
Chelly MS, Fathloun M, Cherif N, Ben Amar M, Tabka Z, Van Praagh E (2009) Effects of a back
squat training program on leg power, jump, and sprint performances in junior soccer players.
J Strength Cond Res 23(8):2241–2249. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e3181b86c40
Cormie P, McBride JM, McCaulley GO (2009) Power-time, force-time, and velocity-time curve
analysis of the countermovement jump: impact of training. J Strength Cond Res 23(1):177–186
Cormie P, McCaulley GO, McBride JM (2007a) Power versus strength-power jump squat training:
inﬂuence on the load-power relationship. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(6):996–1003
Cormie P, McCaulley GO, Triplett NT, McBride JM (2007b) Optimal loading for maximal power
output during lower-body resistance exercises. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(2):340–349
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2010) Adaptations in athletic performance after ballistic
power versus strength training. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42(8):1582–1598
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2011a) Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 1—
biological basis of maximal power production. Sports Med 41(1):17–38
Cormie P, McGuigan MR, Newton RU (2011b) Developing maximal neuromuscular power: part 2—
training considerations for improving maximal power production. Sports Med 41(2):125–146
Cronin J, McNair PJ, Marshall RN (2001) Velocity speciﬁcity, combination training and sport
speciﬁc tasks. J Sci Med Sport 4(2):168–178
Cronin J, Sleivert G (2005) Challenges in understanding the inﬂuence of maximal power training
on improving athletic performance. Sports Med 35(3):213–234
Davis DS, Briscoe DA, Markowski CT, Saville SE, Taylor CJ (2003) Physical characteristics that
predict vertical jump performance in recreational male athletes. Phys Ther Sport 4(4):167–174
Djuric S, Cuk I, Sreckovic S, Mirkov D, Nedeljkovic A, Jaric S (2016) Selective effects of training
against weight and inertia on muscle mechanical properties. Int J Sports Physiol Perform.
https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2015-0527
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
117


<!-- Page 122 -->
Driss T, Vandewalle H, Monod H (1998) Maximal power and force-velocity relationships during
cycling and cranking exercises in volleyball players. Correlation with the vertical jump test.
J Sports Med Phys Fitness 38(4):286–293
Eckert HM (1968) Angular velocity and range of motion in the vertical and standing broad jumps.
Res Q 39(4):937–942
Emerson SB (1985) Jumping and leaping. In: Hildebrand ME, Bramble DM, Liem KF, Wake DB
(eds) Functional vertebrate morphology. Harvard university Press, Cambridge, pp 58–72
Frost DM, Cronin J, Newton RU (2010) A biomechanical evaluation of resistance: fundamental
concepts for training and sports performance. Sports Med 40(4):303–326
Genuario SE, Dolgener FA (1980) The relationship of isokinetic torque at two speeds to the
vertical jump. Res Q Exerc Sport 51(4):593–598
Harris NK, Cronin JB, Hopkins WG, Hansen KT (2008) Squat jump training at maximal power
loads vs. heavy loads: effect on sprint ability. J Strength Cond Res 22(6):1742–1749
Hautier CA, Linossier MT, Belli A, Lacour JR, Arsac LM (1996) Optimal velocity for maximal
power production in non-isokinetic cycling is related to muscle ﬁbre type composition. Eur J
Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 74(1–2):114–118
James RS, Navas CA, Herrel A (2007) How important are skeletal muscle mechanics in setting
limits on jumping performance? J Exp Biol 210(Pt 6):923–933
Jaric S, Markovic G (2009) Leg muscles design: the maximum dynamic output hypothesis. Med
Sci Sports Exerc 41(4):780–787
Jimenez-Reyes P, Samozino P, Brughelli M, Morin JB (2016) Effectiveness of an individualized
training based on force-velocity proﬁling during jumping. Front Physiol 7:677. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fphys.2016.00677
Jimenez-Reyes P, Samozino P, Cuadrado-Penaﬁel V, Conceicao F, Gonzalez-Badillo JJ, Morin JB
(2014) Effect of countermovement on power-force-velocity proﬁle. Eur J Appl Physiol. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00421-014-2947-1
Kaneko M, Fuchimoto T, Toji H, Suei K (1983) Training effect of different loads on the
force-velocity relationship and mechanical power output in human muscle. Scand J Sports Sci
5(2):50–55
Knudson DV (2009) Correcting the use of the term “power” in the strength and conditioning
literature. J Strength Cond Res 23(6):1902–1908
Kotzamanidis C, Chatzopoulos D, Michailidis C, Papaiakovou G, Patikas D (2005) The effect of a
combined high-intensity strength and speed training program on the running and jumping ability
of soccer players. J Strength Cond Res 19(2):369–375. https://doi.org/10.1519/R-14944.1
Markovic G, Jaric S (2007) Positive and negative loading and mechanical output in maximum
vertical jumping. Med Sci Sports Exerc 39(10):1757–1764
Markovic G, Vuk S, Jaric S (2011) Effects of jump training with negative versus positive loading
on jumping mechanics. Int J Sports Med 32:1–8
Marsh RL (1994) Jumping ability of anuran amphibians. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 38B:51–111
McBride JM, Kirby TJ, Haines TL, Skinner J (2010) Relationship between relative net vertical
impulse and jump height in jump squats performed to various squat depths and with various
loads. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 5(4):484–496
McBride JM, Triplett-McBride T, Davie A, Newton RU (2002) The effect of heavy- vs. light-load
jump squats on the development of strength, power, and speed. J Strength Cond Res
16(1):75–82
Minetti AE (2002) On the mechanical power of joint extensions as affected by the change in
muscle force (or cross-sectional area), ceteris paribus. Eur J Appl Physiol 86(4):363–369
Morin JB, Samozino P (2016) Interpreting power-force-velocity proﬁles for individualized and
speciﬁc training. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 11(2):267–272. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.
2015-0638
Newton RU, Kraemer WJ (1994) Developing explosive muscular power: implications for a mixed
methods training strategy. Strength Conditioning 16(5):20–31
118
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 123 -->
Nuzzo JL, McBride JM, Dayne AM, Israetel MA, Dumke CL, Triplett NT (2011) Testing of the
maximal dynamic output hypothesis in trained and untrained subjects. J Strength Cond Res 24
(5):1269–1276
Pandy MG, Zajac FE (1991) Optimal muscular coordination strategies for jumping. J Biomech 24
(1):1–10
Pazin N, Berjan B, Nedeljkovic A, Markovic G, Jaric S (2013) Power output in vertical jumps:
does optimum loading depend on activity proﬁles? Eur J Appl Physiol 113(3):577–589. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00421-012-2464-z
Pazin N, Bozic P, Bobana B, Nedeljkovic A, Jaric S (2011) Optimum loading for maximizing
muscle power output: the effect of training history. Eur J Appl Physiol 111(9):2123–2130.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-011-1840-4
Rejc E, Lazzer S, Antonutto G, Isola M, di Prampero PE (2010) Bilateral deﬁcit and EMG activity
during explosive lower limb contractions against different overloads. Eur J Appl Physiol 108
(1):157–165
Samozino P, Edouard P, Sangnier S, Brughelli M, Gimenez P, Morin JB (2014) Force-velocity
proﬁle: imbalance determination and effect on lower limb ballistic performance. Int J Sports
Med 35(6):505–510. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1354382
Samozino P, Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A (2008) A simple method for measuring force, velocity
and power output during squat jump. J Biomech 41(14):2940–2945
Samozino P, Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A (2010) Jumping ability: a theoretical integrative
approach. J Theor Biol 264(1):11–18
Samozino P, Rejc E, Di Prampero PE, Belli A, Morin JB (2012) Optimal force-velocity proﬁle in
ballistic movements. Altius: citius or fortius? Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(2):313–322
Sheppard J, Cormack S, Taylor K, McGuigan M, Newton R (2008) Assessing the force-velocity
characteristics of the leg extensors in well-trained athletes: the incremental load power proﬁle.
J Strength Cond Res 22(4):1320–1326
Stone MH, Moir G, Glaister M, Sanders R (2002) How much strength is necessary? Phys Ther
Sport 3:88–96
Ugrinowitsch C, Tricoli V, Rodacki AL, Batista M, Ricard MD (2007) Inﬂuence of training
background on jumping height. J Strength Cond Res 21(3):848–852
Vandewalle H, Peres G, Heller J, Panel J, Monod H (1987) Force-velocity relationship and
maximal power on a cycle ergometer. Correlation with the height of a vertical jump. Eur J Appl
Physiol Occup Physiol 56(6):650–656
Winter EM (2005) Jumping: power or impulse. Med Sci Sports Exerc 37(3):523–524
Yamauchi J, Ishii N (2007) Relations between force-velocity characteristics of the knee-hip
extension movement and vertical jump performance. J Strength Cond Res 21(3):703–709
Young W, Wilson G, Byrne C (1999) Relationship between strength qualities and performance in
standing and run-up vertical jumps. J Sports Med Phys Fitness 39(4):285–293
5
Optimal Force-Velocity Proﬁle in Ballistic Push-off …
119

