# Chapter 10: The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics Using Instrumented Treadmills


<!-- Page 212 -->
Chapter 10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics
Using Instrumented Treadmills
Jean-Benoit Morin, Scott R. Brown and Matthew R. Cross
Abstract Since sprinting involves very fast movement velocities (up to 12 m/s in
the best athletes), experimental studies in this ﬁeld have always been a technical
challenge. Whilst sprint kinematics and distance-time or velocity-time variables
were ﬁrst described by the end of the 19th century, kinetics and especially ground
reaction force and mechanical power outputs have remained unexplored until the
1970s and 1980s. Cutting edge laboratory installations now allow for full-length
sprint acceleration studies (single or multiple sprint protocols) with track-embedded
force plates. However, a signiﬁcant amount of literature and knowledge has been
previously established by the use of instrumented treadmills. These were ﬁrst
non-motorized and not directly measuring the ground reaction force (end of the
1980s), but the most up-to-date device allows investigation of sprint mechanics and
three-dimensional ground reaction force during an accelerated run (from zero to
maximal velocity). In this chapter, we will present the historical development of
these devices, along with their advantages and limitations, and the main experi-
mental results obtained with the motorized accelerated treadmill. In particular, we
will present the key concept of mechanical effectiveness of ground force applica-
tion, and how it is related to sprint performance. Furthermore, we will discuss the
muscular underpinnings of the mechanical effectiveness; speciﬁcally the role of hip
extensors. Finally, we will discuss the comparison between treadmill and track
J.-B. Morin (&)
Laboratory of Human Motricity, Education Sport and Health,
Université Côte D’Azur, 261 Route de Grenoble, Route de Grenoble Nice, France
e-mail: jean-benoit.morin@unice.fr
S. R. Brown  M. R. Cross
Sports Performance Research Institute New Zealand (SPRINZ),
Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand
e-mail: scott.brown@aut.ac.nz
M. R. Cross
e-mail: matt.cross@aut.ac.nz
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_10
211


<!-- Page 213 -->
sprint performance and mechanics, including data from elite sprinters, and how
current and future research on this topic will allow a deeper understanding of this
seemingly simple yet complex motor task.
Treadmills will get you nowhere
Anonymous
10.1
Introduction
Sprint running consists of reaching and trying to maintain one’s absolute maximal
running velocity. This can be done by starting from a still position like in track and
ﬁeld sprint events (starting-block start), or from an already ongoing movement like
in soccer or rugby (ﬂying start). Be it a direct or indirect determinant of athletic
performance, sprint running is a key ability in many sports. For this reason, it is the
focus of speciﬁc training programs and exercises. A deeper understanding of the
mechanics of sprinting will undoubtedly help better design training exercises to
improve injury prevention and/or manage rehabilitation and return-to-sport strate-
gies. The ﬁeld of sports biomechanics, like other ﬁelds of sports science, is
dependent on advances in technology available to explore human locomotion. This
is particularly important when studying sprinting, i.e. an all-out ballistic activity
that makes the human body move at velocities ranging 8–12 m/s (30–40 km/h),
making any direct biomechanical measurement rather challenging. At such maxi-
mal running velocity, a trained male athlete can cover more than 10 m in one
second. Measuring any kind of biomechanical data in this context is very difﬁcult.
For instance, the ﬁrst study to report ground reaction force (GRF) data on several
steps of an acceleration in elite sprinters was published in 2015 (Rabita et al. 2015),
on the basis of the pioneering work of Cavagna et al. (1971).
A common alternative is to have the athlete running in place on a treadmill.
However, if running at sub-maximal velocity is a common exercise in both ﬁtness
and research contexts, the development of sprint treadmills has required constant
improvements over the last 40 years. Recently-developed instrumented motorized
treadmills have allowed a signiﬁcant increase in the body of knowledge about the
mechanical determinants of accelerated running performance.
In this chapter, we will brieﬂy review the history of sprint treadmill develop-
ments, and present the devices, the concepts and some of the main results obtained.
Then, we will speciﬁcally focus on an instrumented treadmill presented in 2009 that
allows for both subject-driven accelerations and three-dimensional kinetics mea-
surements, which is to our knowledge the most advanced technology for such a
purpose. We will detail and discuss the mechanical concepts derived from the
measurements (especially the mechanical effectiveness of ground force application)
and how they allowed a more detailed understanding of sprint performance. Finally,
212
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 214 -->
we will review the limitations inherent to this device and the current and future
developments in this area.
10.2
Devices
The understanding of running mechanics had a major breakthrough in the end of the
1970s and 1980s with the use of ground-embedded force platforms to study human
locomotion including jumping, running (Cavagna 1975; Blickhan 1989) and
sprinting (Cavagna et al. 1971). This has allowed researchers to investigate sprint
running mechanics in real overground running conditions, but the major limitation
was that only one or two steps at most could be studied. Two alternatives have been
proposed to study sprint mechanics over longer distances: using a multiple sprint
protocol and aggregate ground-embedded force platform data of several sprints to
reconstruct a virtual acceleration mechanical proﬁle (Cavagna et al. 1971; Rabita
et al. 2015), or have subjects run on an instrumented treadmill. The advantage of the
latter method is the entire sprint data could be recorded (some 400-m sprints have
been previously studied Tomazin et al. 2012), but from the early developments of
this kind of technology in the late 1980s, several limitations have been discussed.
Because this situation is almost the opposite of real-world walking and running
locomotion (in which subjects’ center-of-mass moves relative to the supporting
ground), authors have investigated the differences between ﬁeld and treadmill
running in the past 40 years or so.
In studies comparing these modalities at steady low speeds, van Ingen Schenau
(1980) showed that the mechanics of running were basically similar provided that
the belt speed was constant and a coordinate system moving with the belt was used.
This overall similarity was also supported by other studies (e.g. Kram et al. 1998;
Schache et al. 2001; Riley et al. 2008). However, in several studies authors reported
signiﬁcant differences between the two conditions (Nelson et al. 1972; Dal Monte
et al. 1973; Elliott and Blanksby 1976; Nigg et al. 1995).
When focusing on sprint running, contradicting results have also been reported.
Frishberg (1983) and Kivi et al. (2002) showed biomechanical differences between
ﬁeld and treadmill sprint running, whereas McKenna and Riches (2007) concluded
that sprinting on a treadmill and overground was similar for the majority of the
kinematic variables they studied, but speciﬁed that a motorized treadmill was
necessary to reach this similarity. For this reason, we will detail the main devices
used and their advantages and limitations with this non-motorized versus motorized
distinction in mind.
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
213


<!-- Page 215 -->
10.2.1
Early Non-motorized Treadmills
Modern attempts at experimentally determining mechanical characteristics of the
body during load-bearing sprinting occur most frequently using specialized sprint
treadmill ergometry. This method requires subjects to propel a treadmill belt while
tethered around the waist to an immovable stationary point at the rear of the
machine (Fig. 10.1). The majority of models calculate power output in a
two-dimensional nature, as the interaction of velocity of treadmill belt, measured
via rotary encoders, and horizontal-force via various loading-cells and goniometers
mounted on a non-elastic tether. Although published as an abstract in 1984, the ﬁrst
international publication we know of implementing direct measurements of sprint
running kinetics was by Lakomy (1987) who used an early non-motorized treadmill
(Woodway model AB, Germany) to show that power (P), estimated horizontal
force (FH), and velocity (v) could be accurately measured during a 7-s maximal
sprint.
This major breakthrough came with some limitations inherent to treadmill
assessment. First, instantaneous power values were sampled over large (0.5–1 s or
more) brackets of time and at low sampling frequencies. This resulted in the
incorrect estimation of power and underestimation of velocity. This error has been
avoided in recent studies (sampling frequencies up to 1000 Hz), which improved
the accuracy of averaging methods.
The main limitation of treadmill sprints using force transducers is that the
recorded horizontal force is an approximation, as the tether moves up and down
with each step (movement of <4°; *7% contribution of vertical force to horizontal
readings (Lakomy 1987). While some authors have used goniometers to account for
this bias (Jaskolska et al. 1998; Chelly and Denis 2001), this is not a common
Fig. 10.1 Original (left) and modern (right) non-motorized treadmills. The pulling force is
recorded via a load cell (white circles) and the running velocity is recorded via optical encoders
installed in the rolling belt system
214
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 216 -->
practice. Moreover, although the output of power results from horizontally-directed
force and velocity outputs, these variables are recorded in disparate locations: along
the tether (force) and at the treadmill belt under subjects’ feet (velocity). Because of
this, a substantial amount of force is recorded during the strides aerial phases, due to
a component of body mass acting on the tether and/or some elasticity in the system
(Brughelli et al. 2015).
Furthermore, signiﬁcantly lower maximal running velocity (about 3 m/s,
10.8 km/h (Lakomy 1987) and acceleration have been reported on these ergometers
due to friction and inertia of the overall rolling belt and components. This is an
issue that persists even with motorized instrumented treadmills, with the exception
of feedback controlled models (Bowtell et al. 2009), as will be discussed in the
following section.
10.2.2
Modern Non-motorized Treadmills
Since these original studies, modernized sprint treadmills (Fig. 10.2) have been
shown to provide reliable and accurate assessment of horizontal-power in various
population groups (Brughelli et al. 2011; Cross et al. 2014; Brown et al. 2016). In
addition, it has been used to accurately describe the changes in sprint running
mechanics during a return-to-sport rehabilitation process in rugby players (Brown
and Brughelli 2014).
Although these devices bring signiﬁcant value to the study of sprint mechanics,
in a safe and comfortable environment, care should be taken when processing and
Fig. 10.2 Running velocity (grey) and vertical ground reaction force relative to body mass (black)
during a sprint on a non-motorized treadmill. Vertical ground reaction force data were collected via
four load cells underneath the user-driven belt at 200 Hz. The force trace clearly shows a left-right
asymmetry during the maximal velocity phase
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
215


<!-- Page 217 -->
displaying the data, and a critical attitude should be adopted for the development
and validation of assessment protocols in sport club settings. As pointed out in a
recent letter to the Editor, simply relying on software for data analysis from
equipment companies could lead to ﬂawed results and mechanically inconsistent
data (Brughelli et al. 2015).
10.2.3
Motorized Treadmills
The development of motorized sprint treadmills allow for a compensation of the
aforementioned effects of friction/inertia of the belt and other rolling elements, and
help the athletes reach higher running velocities. This kind of technology has been
used to quantify mechanical power output in various types of sportsmen (e.g.
Chelly and Denis 2001) and investigate the force-velocity relationships in sprinting
(Jaskolska et al. 1998). These authors showed that a multiple-trial method could be
used to accurately proﬁle force-velocity relationships on a sprint-specialized
motorized treadmill ergometer (Gymrol Sprint 1800, France). To provide resistance
for each loading condition, the motors were set to apply an increasing resistance,
across a set of 6 sprints (68, 108, 135, 176, 203 and 270N), during which FH was
estimated via a tether-mounted force-transducer and goniometer, and velocity via a
sensor system attached to the rear drum of the belt. A major limitation remaining
was that the force output measurements were made along the attachment tether, and
not at the ground level. This limitation was then answered with the development of
force-sensor mounted treadmills.
10.2.4
Motorized Treadmills Equipped with Force Sensors
A ﬁrst attempt was made to obtain GRF by installing a force platform ﬁrst directly
under the rolling belt (Kram and Powell 1989). The vertical component of the GRF
could be accurately measured, but due to the direct contact between the belt and the
force platform upper frame at each step, the measurement of the horizontal com-
ponent was altered by friction and cross-talk phenomena. A few years later, the
same research group, presented a treadmill entirely mounted (frame, belt, rolling
components and motor) on a force platform system (Kram et al. 1998). Following
the same procedure, a three-dimension GRF motorized treadmill was also presented
by Belli and his colleagues for walking purposes (Belli et al. 2001) with a split-belt
system allowing for the measurement of separate limbs. This treadmill was then
adapted for running (e.g. Avogadro et al. 2004; Divert et al. 2005; Morin et al.
2011c) and mounted on four rigid piezo-electric force sensors positioned under the
216
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 218 -->
treadmill (Kislter, Winthertür, Switzerland). The entire frame and motor are posi-
tioned on the sensors allowing measurements of the vertical, antero-posterior and
medio-lateral components of the GRF. This was done after appropriate “tare” of the
force sensors when the treadmill was mounted on the force sensor, and static-force
calibration (Belli et al. 2001).
Both of these devices have been shown to give typical vertical and horizontal
GRF-time
traces
that
are
very
consistent
with
those
reported
using
ground-embedded force platforms. This was a major improvement in measuring
running mechanics compared to tethered systems, but regarding sprint running
conditions, these treadmills still had two main limitations: they did not allow for
sprint running conditions at very high velocity >6 to 7 m/s (>25 to 26 km/h), and
they only allowed for steady-state running (i.e. at constant velocity), and not
accelerated running, which is typical in sprinting.
The non-maximal speed limitation was lifted in studies where the treadmill
motor could set high-to-maximal constant speed imposed on the subjects either to
match the one previously measured in the ﬁeld. An example of the ﬁrst type of
setting is given in the study of Frishberg (1983), who recorded a typical sprint
performance (a 91.44-m sprint) through 9.14-m sections in order to set the speed of
the treadmill belt with corresponding increasing values (one mean 9.14-m constant
speed value for every span corresponding to those covered in ﬁeld conditions). The
second type of setting typically requires subjects to run at constant velocities either
corresponding to their maximal speed recorded beforehand during ﬁeld measure-
ments (e.g. Frishberg 1983; Kivi et al. 2002) or to the maximal speed they are able
to maintain for a few steps performed after a lowering movement from the handrails
onto the moving treadmill belt (e.g. Weyand et al. 2000, 2010; Kivi et al. 2002;
Bundle et al. 2003) Both of these settings do not exactly reproduce “free” sprint
running on the ﬁeld during which the runner’s speed constantly changes as a
function of the amount of force applied onto the supporting ground, and over a
typical acceleration phase. In particular, during acceleration, the speed increases
from null to maximal speed, and thus by deﬁnition with no constant speed phase in
between. Bowtell et al. (2009) proposed that such a fundamental basic of ﬁeld
sprinting mechanics should be respected in treadmill conditions to better simulate
ﬁeld sprint. Basically, subjects (through their muscular actions) should “command”
the belt speed, not the other way around: “to measure peak performance there is a
requirement for a runner to speedup and slowdown as they want and the speed of
the treadmill belt should be capable of responding adequately and consistently”
(Bowtell et al. 2009). Although high-speed motorized instrumented treadmills
(Fig. 10.3) allowed for major insights into sprint mechanics (e.g. Weyand et al.
2000, 2010; Clark and Weyand 2014; Clark et al. 2016), the above limitation of
acceleration measurements still remained an issue, especially for investigating the
role of muscle groups involved in accelerated running, as pointed out by Schache
(Schache et al. 2014, 2015).
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
217


<!-- Page 219 -->
10.3
Sprint Acceleration Mechanics on a Motorized
Instrumented Treadmill
The aforementioned devices meet many of the concerns raised by previous authors;
during a sprint acceleration, GRF is averaged over each single foot contact, cor-
responding to a single ballistic event of one push at a high sampling rate (1000 Hz)
and the power output in the horizontal direction is calculated instantaneously as the
product of horizontal component of the GRF and velocity collected at the same
location (i.e. treadmill belt). But the most challenging technological improvement
was to have the treadmill belt speed increase under the force output of the athletes,
in order to simulate sprint acceleration at best, from zero to maximal running
velocity.
This was made possible with a new instrumented sprint-treadmill technology
(ADAL3D-WR; Medical Development, HEF Tecmachine, Andrézieux-Bouthéon,
France)1 based on the existing model used for constant-speed walking (Belli et al.
2001) or running (Avogadro et al. 2004; Morin et al. 2007). The device (Fig. 10.4)
is mounted on a highly rigid metal frame ﬁxed to the ground through four piezo-
electric force transducers (KI 9077b, Kistler, Winterthur, Switzerland), and installed
on a specially engineered concrete slab to ensure maximal rigidity of the supporting
ground. The main technical details of the treadmill are: a 4 kW brushless motor; a
force range of 60 kN in the vertical direction and 10 kN in the mediolateral and
Fig. 10.3 High-speed instrumented sprint treadmill allows the athlete to drop on the rolling belt
and perform a few steps at his top running velocity while anteroposterior and vertical ground
reaction force is measured. Credit P. G. Weyand, South Methodist University Locomotor
Performance Laboratory
1See this video of a typical sprint acceleration on this treadmill: https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=NkGNOPSIJus.
218
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 220 -->
anteroposterior directions; cross-talk effects between directions <2%; a natural
frequency of *140 Hz in all three directions; and a belt surface available for
running of 2.53  0.54 m. To our knowledge, this treadmill is currently used for
research and athletes monitoring at the University of Saint-Etienne (France) and at
the ASPETAR Medical Center in Doha (Qatar).
Beyond the classical constant velocity mode, a “constant driving torque” mode
was added, with the torque set accurately so that, for each subject, the default motor
torque could overcome the friction on the belt due to subject’s body-mass. This
default torque setting as a function of belt friction is in line with previous
motorized-treadmill studies (Falk et al. 1996; Jaskolska et al. 1998; Chelly and
Denis 2001), and with the detailed discussion by McKenna and Riches in their
recent study comparing “torque treadmill” sprint to overground sprint (McKenna
and Riches 2007).
As seen in Fig. 10.5, the raw vertical and horizontal force signals are sampled
simultaneously with running velocity, and then averaged for each support phase
(vertical force above 20N) for a step-by-step analysis of the main running kine-
matics (spatio-temporal variables) and kinetics (Fig. 10.6).
Fig. 10.4 Sprint instrumented motorized treadmill allowing direct and immediate changes in belt
velocity following subject’s actions during sprint acceleration, from null to maximal running
velocity
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
219


<!-- Page 221 -->
Fig. 10.5 Running velocity (black trace) and vertical (blue) and horizontal (red) components of
the ground reaction force during a sprint acceleration (sampling frequency of 1000 Hz). The
subject here is a physical education student not specialized in sprinting (body mass of 80 kg)
Fig. 10.6 Vertical and horizontal components of the ground reaction force (upper panel), running
velocity (lower left) and power output in the horizontal direction (lower right) for all steps of the
acceleration until top speed for a world-class sprinter (100-m best time: 9.92 s) and a
non-specialist
220
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 222 -->
10.3.1
Kinematics and Kinetics
The main running spatio-temporal, GRF and spring-mass variables (see Chap. 8)
may then be obtained and compared within and between athletes. For instance,
Table 10.1 shows the averaged mechanical data for the ﬁrst and second half of a
sprint acceleration from standing start to top-speed in an elite sprinter (best 100-m
time of 9.92 s) versus a healthy young subject of similar body mass (81 kg), not
specialized in sprinting.
Beyond this classical descriptive analysis of the main sprint running pattern
mechanics, the instrumented accelerated treadmill allowed us to compute and study
individual force-velocity and power-velocity relationships.
10.3.2
Force-Velocity and Power-Velocity Relationships
On the basis of the simultaneous, high rate GRF and running velocity measure-
ments described above, FH and velocity may be averaged for each support phase
(dynamic action onto the running surface) and plotted throughout the course of a
sprint for each stance phase (Morin et al. 2010), as in sprint-cycling studies (e.g.
Dorel et al. 2010). As shown in Fig. 10.7, the entire force-velocity relationship is
described by the maximal theoretical horizontal force that the lower limbs could
produce over one contact at a null velocity (FH0), and the theoretical maximum
velocity that could be produced during a support phase in the absence of
mechanical constraints (v0). A higher v0 value represents a greater ability to develop
Table 10.1 Mean values of contact time (tc), aerial time (ta), step frequency (Fq), vertical (FV),
horizontal (FH) and resultant (FTot) GRF, vertical displacement of the center of mass (Dy) and
vertical (kvert) stiffness (kleg)
Variable
tc
(ms)
ta
(ms)
Fq
(Hz)
FV
(N)
FH
(N)
FTot
(N)
Dy (cm)
kvert
(kN m−1)
1st half of the
acceleration
Elite
sprinter
134
88
4.47
1287
412
1354
–
–
Non
sprinter
208
177
2.74
1036
260
1073
–
–
2nd half of the
acceleration
Elite
sprinter
120
78
4.89
1506
254
1528
1.94
107
Non
sprinter
141
231
2.77
1335
151
1343
5.56
57
The values are averaged for all steps separated into equal number of steps over the acceleration (1st
and 2nd half) for each athlete. For example, the elite sprinter reached his top speed in 26 steps, so
averaged values for steps 1–13 are used to describe the 1st half of the acceleration, and data from
steps 14–26 are used to describe the 2nd half of the acceleration. Spring-mass model data are
shown for the 2nd phase only since the basis postulates of the spring-mass model for running
require a constant or near-constant running speed (see Chap. 8)
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
221


<!-- Page 223 -->
horizontal force at high velocities, as shown in Fig. 10.8. This is a clear mechanical
difference between elite and lower-level sprinters (Morin et al. 2012; Rabita et al.
2015). The criterion of averaging force over a single contact time is important from
a biomechanical perspective, as the force-velocity relationship directly relates to
lower limb mechanical capabilities. When multiplying FH and v values for each
support phase, the equivalent of a mechanical power in the horizontal direction is
Fig. 10.7 Graphical representation of force-velocity relationship determined via treadmill
ergometry. The data points represent values averaged across each support phase, from the ﬁrst
to the last at peak velocity. FH0 and v0 represent the y and x intercepts, and the theoretical
maximum of force and velocity able to be produced in absence of their opposing unit
Fig. 10.8 Linear force-velocity (left panel) and 2nd degree polynomial power-velocity (right
panel) relationships during treadmill sprint acceleration for a world-class sprinter (100-m best time:
9.92 s) and a non-specialist
222
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 224 -->
obtained (P), and the power-velocity may be computed (Fig. 10.8). Values of Pmax
obtained via this method (when converted to similar time-periods) and mechanical
variables (FH0 and v0) are congruent with results from comparable subject pools and
loading parameters in earlier studies (Cheetham et al. 1985; Jaskolska et al. 1998;
Funato et al. 2001; Morin and Belli 2004) and are highly reliable for test-retest
measurement.
10.3.3
Effectiveness of Ground Force Application
Deﬁnitions In addition to the aforementioned force-velocity-power relationships,
updated treadmill ergometry allows mechanical effectiveness to be quantiﬁed
throughout a sprint acceleration phase. In the cycling literature (Davis and Hull
1981; Dorel et al. 2010), pedal-mounted force sensors have allowed the compu-
tation of force application indices that indicate, for each pedal down stroke, the ratio
of the effective component of the force applied to the pedal by the cyclist (i.e. the
component oriented perpendicularly to the crank arm) to the resultant (total) force
applied to the pedal (Fig. 10.9). The higher the perpendicular component of the
resultant force, the higher the mechanical effectiveness, and the more force that will
actually drive the pedal for a given muscular force output. Note that the mechanical
effectiveness may be equally expressed as the angle between the effective com-
ponent and the resultant force (a in Fig. 10.9), or as a percentage. For example, a
mechanical effectiveness of 80% means that over a pedal downstroke, the average
effective force will be 80% of the resultant force applied to the pedal.
Following the same idea, GRF output from modern treadmills can be expressed
as a ratio of the ‘effective’ horizontal component of GRF (i.e FH) to total force (i.e.
FTot) averaged across each contact phase (i.e. ‘ratio of forces’: RF) as deﬁned by
Morin et al. (2011a). While it is possible (and encouraged) to maximize RF (i.e. up
Fig. 10.9 Schematic representation of the concept of mechanical effectiveness of force
application, from cycling to sprint running. In cycling (left), effectiveness is computed as the
ratio between the effective component (FEFF which will cause the rotation) and the total i.e.
resultant force produced by the active muscles (FTot). The other component is ineffective. During a
sprint running acceleration (right), the analogy we propose gives effectiveness as the ratio
RF = FHzt/FTot
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
223


<!-- Page 225 -->
to 100%) in cycling, the requirement of a vertical component in sprint running
means that it is impossible to present a maximal RF value without falling. Instead,
in sprint running we observed sub-maximal values of RF (30–45%) at the begin-
ning an accelerated sprint on the treadmill, which systematically decreases with a
clear linear trend with increasing velocity (Fig. 10.10). This is a logical outcome as
when the athletes move faster during an acceleration (or propel the treadmill belt
faster) their overall body posture tends to orient upright, which is related to an
overall progressive vertical orientation (i.e. less effective) of the GRF vector at each
support phase. Interestingly, we systematically observed that this decrease in RF
with increasing speed was linear, in human runners ranging from elite sprinters to
non-sprinters. In theory, and as conﬁrmed by track-embedded force plate GRF
measurements (see below), the value of RF decreases down to approximately 0% as
the maximal velocity is reached. At this moment of the sprint, the athlete’s
acceleration is null, and FH averaged over the support phase is null (equal braking
and propulsive impulses cancel out), or quasi null in real-life sprinting since air
friction force is low (between 30 and 40N).
Furthermore, the slope of this linear decrease in RF (‘decrement in ratio of
forces’: DRF), with velocity is described as an index of force application technique.
This slope is negative (decrease in RF as velocity increases) and a typical DRF value
of −0.079 as in Fig. 10.10 may be expressed as −7.9%, which describes the fact
that over this sprint acceleration, the RF as decreased on average by 7.9% for each
new meter per second of running velocity generated. It follows that, in theory, the
best sprinters are able to accelerate more and over a longer period, and have
therefore a lower decrease in RF as velocity increases, i.e. a less negative DRF. Vice
versa, we hypothesized that more negative DRF values would indicate a fast
decrease in RF over acceleration, with runners reaching an upright body posture
prematurely and not being able to accelerate anymore (RF of 0%) very early into
the
acceleration.
These
hypotheses
of
a
relationship
between
mechanical
Fig. 10.10 Ratio of Force as
a function of running velocity
during a sprint acceleration on
a motorized instrumented
treadmill for a world-class
sprinter (100-m best time:
9.92 s) and a non-specialist.
The blue circles represent the
extrapolation of the linear
relationship between ratio of
force and running velocity to
the theoretical value of 0%
reached at maximal velocity
224
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 226 -->
effectiveness of force application and sprint acceleration and overall performance
have been tested in two treadmill protocols and a study performed on a sprint track.
Relationship with sprint performance. In a ﬁrst study (Morin et al. 2011a),
Morin et al. tested whether mechanical effectiveness of force application (especially
the DRF index) was correlated to 100-m performance, i.e. were the athletes with a
more effective propulsion as measured on the treadmill the fastest on the track and
vice versa. The maximal power output measured in the laboratory was highly and
positively correlated, but more importantly, the best performance on the track
(100-m time and maximal velocity and acceleration capability over 4 s) was
observed in subjects who had a “good” DRF, i.e. a value of −6 to −5%. Conversely,
subjects who had a “poor” DRF value on the treadmill (−7 to −10%) were the
slowest at the track 100-m test. An interesting additional result was that the hori-
zontal component of the GRF (FH) was signiﬁcantly correlated to 100-m perfor-
mance which makes sense in the biomechanical context of human locomotion
aiming at propelling the body mass in the forward direction. However, the resultant
(total) GRF averaged over the 6-s acceleration on the treadmill was not correlated to
any sprint performance variable. This means that the total force output measured on
the treadmill (taken regardless of its orientation in space) was not a performance
indicator. At ﬁrst sight, this appears to contradict previous work by Weyand et al.
(2000) showing that faster athletes were able to produce more GRF per unit body
mass. However, it is important to note that only the vertical component of the GRF
was studied by Weyand et al., and only at the very speciﬁc moment of maximal
velocity, and in a very heterogeneous population mixing untrained females and
Olympian male sprinters. When the GRF output (i.e. the resulting, net, mechanical
output from the entire propelling effort of the neuromuscular system) was consid-
ered over the entire acceleration phase, in a homogeneous group of athletes, it was
not correlated to sprint performance. This study gave a ﬁrst insight into our “force
production and transmission to the ground” general view of sprint acceleration.
That said, an issue with this ﬁrst study was that the best athlete that participated had
a 100-m best time of 10.9 s, which does not allow to extend these conclusions to
elite athletes.
In a second study (Morin et al. 2012), the same group of athletes repeated the
very same protocol (treadmill sprint to measure mechanical GRF output capability
and mechanical effectiveness of force application and track 100-m test of sprint
performance), but tested this time 3 national level sprinters (best 100-m times
ranging from 10.3 to 10.6 s) and a world-class sprinter (best 100-m time of 9.92 s at
the time of the study). The results conﬁrmed those found in the ﬁrst study, with the
elite athlete showing a very effective force application (DRF of −4%), despite a
resultant GRF per unit body weight within the range of that of much slower
individuals
(no
difference
with
his
peers,
very
small
difference
with
non-specialists). One biomechanical explanation of this world-class sprinter’s
ability to run fast was not his outstanding force production capability (at the time he
ran 9.92 s, he had never practiced heavy-weight strength training) but his
extraordinary capability of orienting the GRF vector forward when pushing the
ground,
especially
at
high
running
velocities
(Figs. 10.10
and
10.11).
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
225


<!-- Page 227 -->
This DRF value of −4.2% is the most effective value reported in the scientiﬁc
literature to our knowledge (Table 10.2).
Practically, these variables demonstrate the ability to maintain effective orien-
tation of global force production throughout a sprint (independently from the
magnitude of the resultant GRF output) under increasing velocity, and add another
level of analysis to sprint running acceleration mechanics. That being said, a correct
interpretation of Newton’s fundamental law of dynamics would have led to the
same conclusions: the ﬁrst part of the law states that the alteration of motion
(acceleration) is proportional to the motive force impressed: more net external force
applied to a given mass (e.g. GRF and body mass) means more acceleration. But
the second, often overlooked, part of the law states that this acceleration is made in
the direction of the right line in which that force is impressed: more net force in the
fore-aft direction means more forward acceleration.
Muscular determinants: the hip extensors hypothesis. The aforementioned
studies presented the concept of mechanical effectiveness of force application, its
main indices RF and DRF, and showed that they were signiﬁcantly correlated to
track sprint acceleration performance, from non-specialists to elite sprinters. In
order to transfer these laboratory conclusions into sports practice, the main ques-
tions that needed to be answered were then: (1) what are the neuromuscular
determinants of the mechanical effectiveness? (2) are they trainable, and if so, how?
(3) since all the results and conclusions drawn above are based on instrumented
treadmill measurements, do they still old true in “real” track sprint conditions? The
latter question will be addressed in the limitation section of this chapter.
The second question is still under study, but a recent work has brought an
answer to the ﬁrst question as to the muscular determinants of an effective forward
propulsion. We termed this set of research the “hip extensors hypothesis”. The three
most important arguments supporting this hypothesis were:
First, several experimental and/or modeling studies showed the key role of hip
extensors muscles (gluteal and hamstring) in running performance (e.g. Schache
Fig. 10.11 Individual linear
relationship between the ratio
of force and the running
velocity during a sprint
acceleration for
non-specialists (physical
education students, in grey),
national-level sprinters (in
white) and a world-class
sprinter (100-m best time:
9.92 s, in black)
226
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 228 -->
Table 10.2 Main sprint acceleration mechanical outputs averaged over the 6-s acceleration on an instrumented motorized treadmill (±Standard deviation)
Variable
World-class
sprinter
National-level
sprinters
% difference with
WCS
Non-specialists
% difference with
non-specialists
Horizontal component of GRF
(FH in N/kg)
3.90
3.44 ± 0.29
−11.8
3.04 ± 0.51
−22.1a
Vertical component of GRF (FV in N/kg)
18.1
17.6 ± 0.58
−3.24
15.7 ± 1.17
−13.5a
Resultant (total) GRF (FTot in N/kg)
18.6
17.9 ± 0.59
−3.68
16.0 ± 1.19
−14.2a
Mechanical effectiveness of force
application DRF (%)
−4.21
−6.00 ± 0.6
−42.9b
−8.21 ± 2.9
−95.2b
Comparison between a world-class sprinter (WCS, personal 100-m best time of 9.92 s), national-level sprinters (personal best times ranging from 10.3 and
10.6 s) and active physical education students, non-specialists of sprinting
aDifference greater than 2 Standard deviations
bDifference greater than 3 standard deviations
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
227


<!-- Page 229 -->
et al. 2014, 2015). Based on experimental and modeling approaches used in various
types of subjects including elite sprinters, research has consistently showed that the
hip extensors played an increasing role as running speed increased up to maximal
sprint values (typically above 7 m/s, 25.2 km/h) (Mann and Sprague 1980;
Simonsen et al. 1985; Belli et al. 2002; Kyröläinen et al. 2005; Dorn et al. 2012;
Schache et al. 2015). However, these studies mostly considered high but constant
running velocity (no acceleration) and did not relate this hip extensor activity to
direct measurements of propulsive GRF or mechanical effectiveness.
Second, to produce high amounts of horizontal GRF and impulse (Morin et al.
2015b), especially at high velocity (i.e. when the body posture is upright), intense
backward actions of the lower limb are necessary during both swing and support
phases. It is therefore anatomically and functionally reasonable to expect the hip
extensors to produce very high forces during both phases (Sun et al. 2015). Because
sprinting is associated with great limb velocities prior to ground impact at each step,
this swing-support transition moment is crucial for hamstrings, which counteract
very high external hip ﬂexion and knee extension moments in the context of support
forces as high as eight times body weight (Sun et al. 2015). In addition, it is
interesting to note that, as Fig. 10.11 clearly shows, the difference in mechanical
effectiveness between non-specialists, high-level sprinters and the elite athlete
tested is visible at high running velocities, not at the beginning of the sprint
acceleration. This tends to suggest that the ability to produce high RF and orient the
GRF with a good effectiveness is particularly higher in best sprinters at high run-
ning velocity (Morin et al. 2012), i.e. when the overall body orientation is vertical,
and lower limbs joint angular velocity and the associated muscle mechanical stress
are at their highest. What distinguishes the best sprinters (Fig. 10.11) is not their
effectiveness and ability to produce high amounts of FH at slow running velocity,
but their ability to do so at high to very high velocity. The key here is to produce
high amounts of FH in the very speciﬁc context of high running velocity: “strong at
high velocity”.
Finally, and interestingly, the fact that hamstring injuries are the most prevalent
and recurrent lower limb muscle injury associated with sprinting tasks presupposes
the importance of this muscle group in the context of high speed and/or accelera-
tions (e.g. Ekstrand et al. 2011; Feddermann-Demont et al. 2014).
In order to test this hypothesis, Morin et al. (2015a) used an instrumented
treadmill that allowed two novel experimental features: (1) measure simultaneously
and time-synchronize the muscular activity (surface electromyography) of the main
lower limb muscles and the GRF (including FH) (2) do so over an entire sprint
acceleration from zero to maximal velocity and analyze every step for one leg. To
our knowledge, no equivalent measurements of muscle activity synchronized with
GRF outputs have been performed, except very recent GRF measurements per-
formed over an entire 50-m sprint, thanks to an innovative force plate measurement
system (Nagahara et al. 2017). As shown in Fig. 10.12, this experimental setting
was completed by isokinetic joint torque testing to provide an indirect idea of
subjects’ torque production capability at the hip and knee, in extension and ﬂexion,
concentric and eccentric modes. Although contraction velocities and range of
228
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 230 -->
motion strongly differ between sprint running and isokinetic testing, this technique
was selected to provide an indication about subjects’ overall force capability, since
it is currently impossible to directly assess muscle force output during sprint run-
ning. The main results of the study showed that, as hypothesized, the highest level
of FH during the sprint acceleration was observed in subjects who had both the
highest torque production capability of the hip extensors (especially hamstring
muscles in eccentric mode) and the highest hamstring EMG activity during the
end-of-swing phase. A subsequent analysis focused on the initial acceleration phase
(ﬁrst 10 steps) showed a signiﬁcant relationship between FH and glutei concentric
torque capability and glutei EMG activity during the end-of-swing phase. In other
words, hamstring EMG activity during the swing and end-of-the-swing phases and
eccentric knee ﬂexor peak torque are related to the amount of FH produced during
sprinting. These ﬁndings help the suggestion that the hip extensors (especially the
hamstrings), play a signiﬁcant role in sprint acceleration performance via
mechanical effectiveness an FH production.
This singular study requires conﬁrmation, and other muscular determinants of
mechanical effectiveness deserve deeper investigation, such as the capability of the
ankle to resist ground impact and play a role in transmitting the power generated by
the lower limb neuromuscular system to the ground. As commonly reiterated,
Fig. 10.12 Experimental investigation of the role of hip extensors in sprinting mechanical
effectiveness. Left: subjects were equipped with surface electromyography electrodes during their
sprint acceleration on the instrumented motorized treadmill. Right: the ground reaction force signal
(ﬁrst line of data) was synchronized with the right leg muscle activity (other lines) throughout the
acceleration. In addition, subjects hip and knee extensor and ﬂexor torque capability was tested in
concentric and eccentric mode on an isokinetic dynamometer
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
229


<!-- Page 231 -->
“A chain is only as strong as its weakest link”, and although much power is
generated at the hip and knee during sprint acceleration, one should keep in mind
that the GRF is in ﬁne applied onto the supporting ground at the ankle/foot. Future
studies should test whether, as training anecdotal evidence and locomotion
biomechanics suggest, a “strong foot” also plays a role in applying the ground force
with effectiveness, i.e. with a forward orientation, during sprint acceleration.
10.4
Limitations and Future Studies
Although sprint instrumented treadmills have allowed coaches and researchers to
signiﬁcantly improve their level of understanding about human sprinting, this
approach has several limitations that need to be discussed. Keeping these limita-
tions in mind, this corpus of research is relatively novel and future studies will
surely bring more insight into the results hitherto obtained, and a deeper under-
standing of the mechanisms underlying the mechanical effectiveness, its trainability
and the associated training methods.
10.4.1
Main Limitations
Although the most updated motorized instrumented treadmill presented in this
Chapter allows direct GRF measurements in three dimensions during sprint
acceleration, an issue that persists is that the application of compensatory friction
appears to restrict the subject’s ability to reach levels of maximal running velocity
near to overground sprint running (Morin et al. 2010; Morin and Sève 2011).
Moreover, the individualized determination of the default torque is heavily time
consuming, and familiarization persists as a limitation with even the most modern
machines (>10 trials) (Morin et al. 2010). Although the reduction in sprinting
velocity with torque compensated treadmills varies when compared to over-ground
sprinting (*20% according to (Morin and Sève 2011), the main sprint performance
output were signiﬁcantly and highly correlated within the same subjects when
compared with their track sprint performance. Thus, the overall inter-subject dif-
ference in track sprint performance is maintained during treadmill measurements,
and one could argue that the ability to measure direct kinetics over a virtually
unlimited time-period (for instance during a 400-m sprint Tomazin et al. 2012;
Girard et al. 2016c) potentially mitigates this limitation. In addition, some
unpublished data show that when extrapolating the RF-velocity linear relationship
to the velocity axis (see Fig. 10.10), the theoretical maximal velocity calculated is
very close to the actual maximal sprinting velocity reached by the athletes tested
during a track 100-m within the same testing session. In fact, in theory, at maximal
velocity, the acceleration of the athlete is null and thus FH is quasi-null (only the
force to overcome air friction during track sprinting) and RF  0%. Due to the
230
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 232 -->
inertia and friction of the treadmill system (see discussion in Morin and Sève 2011),
the athletes cannot reach their track maximal velocity while sprinting on the
treadmill (values of about 80% are reached). However, should the treadmill allow
such a realistic end of acceleration phase, the estimated maximal velocity
(RF  0% in line with RF values actually measured during the treadmill acceler-
ation, Fig. 10.10) almost perfectly matches track measurements and “real-life”
sprinting conditions.
The scientiﬁc study of human sprinters began more than one century ago with
pioneer biomechanist Marey (2002) and the ﬁrst scientiﬁc articles by physiologist
Archibald V. Hill and his colleagues (Furusawa et al. 1927; Bassett 2002), who
published analyses of sprint mechanics based on time-motion and center of mass
spatiotemporal variables. The analysis of sprint kinetics and GRF requires
ground-embedded force plate systems over the acceleration distance. Since this
technological feat has only very recently been accomplished by Japanese
researchers (Nagahara et al. 2017), the only possibility with the 2- to 7-m force
plate systems hitherto available was to use multiple sprint protocols and aggregate
the data collected to virtually “reconstruct” a complete sprint acceleration dataset.
For example, if a 7-m force plate system is used, athletes step onto the force plate
system for their ﬁrst 3 steps of an acceleration during their ﬁrst trial, and then
moving the starting blocks back for the second trial, the 4th and 5th steps are
recorded, and so on. This approach was used by Cavagna et al. (1971) and more
recently by Rabita et al. (2015). In the latter study, it is interesting to notice that
these authors reported, in highly trained to elite athletes (personal 100-m best time
below 10 s) sprint acceleration kinetics that were very close to those obtained with
the instrumented treadmill presented in this chapter:
• the resultant GRF values and horizontal and vertical components measured on
the track were within the range of those measured on the instrumented treadmill
(for example, maximal horizontal force FH0 of *10 N/kg)
• although maximal RF values in the starting-blocks (*60%) were much higher
than those observed on the treadmill (which is logical given the crouched versus
standing positions), RF values for the ﬁrst steps on the track were within the
range of those measured on the treadmill
• the linear decrease in RF with increasing running velocity observed on the
treadmill (Fig. 10.10) was also found on the track (Fig. 3 in Rabita et al. 2015),
and the DRF values calculated on the track for highly trained sprinters (*−6%)
were in line with those found for the same population on the treadmill
Overall, the main conclusion one can draw from the comparison of published
treadmill (Morin et al. 2010, 2011a, b, 2012; Morin and Sève 2011; Girard et al.
2016c) and track (Morin et al. 2015b; Rabita et al. 2015; Nagahara et al. 2017)
studies of sprint acceleration kinetics is that despite the above-mentioned limita-
tions and obvious difference in sprinting conditions, the main mechanical outputs
(GRF, mechanical effectiveness) are similar when tested in athletes of similar
training and performance level. This of course does not remove the limitations
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
231


<!-- Page 233 -->
associated with sprint treadmill measurements, but it brings support to the fact that
these limitations are outweighed by the numerous experimental possibilities offered
to bring new insights into to complexity of human sprinting. Indeed, as shown in
recent studies, sprint instrumented treadmills allow a step-by-step analysis of sprint
mechanics, and many external conditions to be easily simulated compared to
real-life track sprinting (e.g. repeated sprints, hypoxia, heat).
10.4.2
Latest Studies and Future Research
In 2015, Morin and his colleagues were able to synchronize muscle activity mea-
surements with GRF during entire sprint accelerations to better investigate the role
of lower limb muscles (hip extensors in particular) in sprint acceleration perfor-
mance and mechanical effectiveness. In this study, and as shown in most Figures
from this Chapter, a step-by-step analysis is possible since all the steps of an entire
sprint acceleration are recorded. Based on this key advantage of treadmill sprinting,
it has been possible to investigate fatigue and changes in running mechanics during
short (100-m) to long (400-m sprint events) (Tomazin et al. 2012; Girard et al.
2016c), but also during repeated sprint series. This context is close to the demands
of many team sports such as rugby, soccer or hockey, and has been the recent focus
of several investigations during which it was experimentally easy to require subjects
to repeat sprint accelerations on the treadmill and to set effort-recovery sequences.
This has led to several recent publications by leading author Olivier Girard about
the methodological issues with studying multiple steps and repeated sprints
mechanics (Girard et al. 2015a, 2016a), or the changes in running mechanics
associated with interval training (Girard et al. 2017b).
In addition, some external conditions such as hypoxia and heat may be studied in
laboratory conditions, with the use of an instrumented treadmill within a speciﬁc
laboratory environment allowing the simulation of hypoxia and heat conditions.
This has led to a series of recent works from which a deeper knowledge has been
obtained as to the mechanical consequences of performing sprints under heat stress
(Girard et al. 2016b, 2017a) or in hypoxic conditions (Girard et al. 2015b, 2016b;
Brocherie et al. 2016).
The above-mentioned possibility to record and study each step of a sprint allows
the investigation of inter-limb asymmetry during sprint running. This area of
research has recently been advanced2 using biomechanical modeling (Clark et al.
2017), but also more direct experimental measurements during sprinting (e.g.
Girard et al. 2017c). In particular, a recent work by Brown et al. (2017) compared
the asymmetry between the vertical and horizontal components of the resultant
GRF in rugby players. This study showed that interestingly, the magnitude and
2See this comment on Usain Bolt’s running mechanics: https://phys.org/news/2017-06-symmetry-
usain-asymmetrical-gait.html.
232
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 234 -->
range of asymmetry computed on the horizontal GRF component during acceler-
ation and maximal velocity phases, where much greater than those found in the
vertical component. All these results may have signiﬁcant implications for
better-designed sports training and injury prevention/rehabilitation programs.
This transition towards applications to sport performance and training is another
expected research perspective. In particular, training methods aiming at improving
the mechanical effectiveness of ground force application should be studied, in both
unfatigued and fatigued conditions. Cross-sectional studies have shown that the
mechanical effectiveness of ground force application was a key factor of sprint
performance and largely impaired due to fatigue associated with repeated sprints
(Morin et al. 2011b). It is now time for controlled, longitudinal training studies to
guide sports practitioners toward the most effective way(s) of developing this ability
in athletes. For example, although sprint mechanics were not tested on an instru-
mented treadmill, a pilot training study has recently shown that the use of very
heavy sleds (80% of body mass) was an effective way to improve maximal FH and
RF in soccer players (Morin et al. 2016). In the future, the continued use of
instrumented sprint treadmills and additional laboratory-based methods will
undoubtedly improve our understanding of human locomotion and sports perfor-
mance in this area.
In conclusion, the recent developments of instrumented sprint treadmills, in
particular those allowing three-dimensional ground reaction force measurements
during acceleration (from zero to maximal velocity), have led to signiﬁcant insights
into the mechanics of this key sports ability. Despite some inevitable limitations
associated to the device itself, and hoping for more detailed and numerous studies
performed on track-embedded force plate systems, treadmill sprinting has and will
continue to allow researchers and practitioners to gain more direct experimental
insights into the mechanical underpinnings of this seemingly simple yet in fact so
complicated motor task.
References
Avogadro P, Chaux C, Bourdin M et al (2004) The use of treadmill ergometers for extensive
calculation of external work and leg stiffness during running. Eur J Appl Physiol 92:182–185
Bassett DR (2002) Scientiﬁc contributions of A. V. Hill: exercise physiology pioneer. J Appl
Physiol 93:1567–1582
Belli A, Bui P, Berger A et al (2001) A treadmill ergometer for three-dimensional ground reaction
forces measurement during walking. J Biomech 34:105–112
Belli A, Kyröläinen H, Komi PV (2002) Moment and power of lower limb joints in running. Int J
Sports Med 23:136–141
Blickhan R (1989) The spring-mass model for running and hopping. J Biomech 22:1217–1227
Bowtell MV, Tan H, Wilson AM (2009) The consistency of maximum running speed
measurements in humans using a feedback-controlled treadmill, and a comparison with
maximum attainable speed during overground locomotion. J Biomech 42:2569–2574
Brocherie F, Millet GP, Morin J-B, Girard O (2016) Mechanical alterations to repeated treadmill
sprints in normobaric hypoxia. Med Sci Sport Exerc 48:1570–1579
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
233


<!-- Page 235 -->
Brown SR, Brughelli M (2014) Determining return-to-sport status with a multi-component
assessment strategy: a case study in rugby. Phys Ther Sport 15:211–215
Brown SR, Brughelli M, Cross MR (2016) Proﬁling sprint mechanics by leg preference and
position in rugby union athletes. Int J Sports Med 37:890–897
Brown SR, Cross MR, Girard O et al (2017) Kinetic sprint asymmetries on a non-motorised
treadmill in rugby union athletes. Int J Sport Med (In press)
Brughelli M, Cronin J, Chaouachi A (2011) Effects of running velocity on running kinetics and
kinematics. J Strength Cond Res 25:933–939
Brughelli M, Morin J-B, Mendiguchia J (2015) Asymmetry after hamstring injury in English
Premier League: issue resolved, or perhaps not? Int J Sports Med 36:603
Bundle MW, Hoyt RW, Weyand PG (2003) High-speed running performance: a new approach to
assessment and prediction. J Appl Physiol 95:1955–1962
Cavagna GA (1975) Force platforms as ergometers. J Appl Physiol 39:174–179
Cavagna GA, Komarek L, Mazzoleni S (1971) The mechanics of sprint running. J Physiol
217:709–721
Cheetham ME, Williams C, Lakomy HK (1985) A laboratory running test: metabolic responses of
sprint and endurance trained athletes. Br J Sports Med 19:81–84
Chelly SM, Denis C (2001) Leg power and hopping stiffness: relationship with sprint running
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 33:326–333
Clark KP, Ryan LJ, Weyand PG (2016) A general relationship links gait mechanics and running
ground reaction forces. J Exp Biol (jeb.138057)
Clark KP, Ryan LJ, Weyand PG (2017) A general relationship links gait mechanics and running
ground reaction forces. J Exp Biol 220:247–258
Clark KP, Weyand PG (2014) Are running speeds maximized with simple-spring stance
mechanics? J Appl Physiol 117:604–615
Cross MR, Brughelli ME, Cronin JB (2014) Effects of vest loading on sprint kinetics and
kinematics. J Strength Cond Res 28:1867–1874
Dal Monte A, Fucci S, Manoni A (1973) The treadmill used as a training and simulator instrument
in middle- and long-distance running. In: Krager (ed) Medicine and sport, Basel, pp 359–363
Davis RR, Hull ML (1981) Measurement of pedal loading in bicycling: II. Analysis and results.
J Biomech 14:857–872
Divert C, Mornieux G, Baur H et al (2005) Mechanical comparison of barefoot and shod running.
Int J Sports Med 26:593–598
Dorel S, Couturier A, Lacour JR et al (2010) Force-velocity relationship in cycling revisited:
beneﬁt of two-dimensional pedal forces analysis. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:1174–1183
Dorn TW, Schache AG, Pandy MG (2012) Muscular strategy shift in human running: dependence
of running speed on hip and ankle muscle performance. J Exp Biol 215:1944–1956
Ekstrand J, Hägglund M, Walden M (2011) Epidemiology of muscle injuries in professional
football (Soccer). Am J Sports Med 39:1–7
Elliott BC, Blanksby BA (1976) A cinematographic analysis of overground and treadmill running
by males and females. Med Sci Sport Exerc 8:84–87
Falk B, Weinstein Y, Dotan R et al (1996) A treadmill test of sprint running. Scand J Med Sci
Sports 6:259–264
Feddermann-Demont N, Junge A, Edouard P et al (2014) Injuries in 13 international Athletics
championships between 2007-2012. Br J Sports Med 48:513–522
Frishberg BA (1983) An analysis of overground and treadmill sprinting. Med Sci Sports Exerc
15:478–485
Funato K, Yanagiya T, Fukunaga T (2001) Ergometry for estimation of mechanical power output
in sprinting in humans using a newly developed self-driven treadmill. Eur J Appl Physiol
84:169–173
Furusawa K, Hill AV, Parkinson JL (1927) The dynamics of “Sprint” running. Proc R Soc B Biol
Sci 102:29–42
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B et al (2015a) Comparison of four sections for analyzing running
mechanics alterations during repeated treadmill sprints. J Appl Biomech 31:389–395
234
J.-B. Morin et al.


<!-- Page 236 -->
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B et al (2017a) Mechanical alterations associated with repeated
treadmill sprinting under heat stress. PLoS ONE 12:e0170679
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B, Millet GP (2016a) Intrasession and intersession reliability of
running mechanics during treadmill sprints. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 11:432–439
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B, Millet GP (2017b) Mechanical alterations during
interval-training treadmill runs in high-level male team-sport players. J Sci Med Sport
20:87–91
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B, Millet GP (2016b) Running mechanical alterations during
repeated treadmill sprints in hot versus hypoxic environments. A pilot study. J Sports Sci
34:1190–1198
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B, Millet GP (2015b) Neuro-mechanical determinants of repeated
treadmill sprints—usefulness of an “hypoxic to normoxic recovery” approach. Front Physiol
6:260
Girard O, Brocherie F, Morin J-B, Millet GP (2017c) Lower limb mechanical asymmetry during
repeated treadmill sprints. Hum Mov Sci 52:203–214
Girard O, Brocherie F, Tomazin K et al (2016c) Changes in running mechanics over 100-m, 200-m
and 400-m treadmill sprints. J Biomech 49:1490–1497
Jaskolska A, Goossens P, Veentra B et al (1998) Treadmill measurement of the force-velocity
relationship and power output in subjects with different maximal running velocities. Sports
Med 8:347–358
Kivi DMR, Maraj BKV, Gervais P (2002) A kinematic analysis of high-speed treadmill sprinting
over a range of velocities. Med Sci Sports Exerc 34:662–666
Kram R, Grifﬁn TM, Donelan JM, Chang YH (1998) Force treadmill for measuring vertical and
horizontal ground reaction forces. J Appl Physiol 85:764–769
Kram R, Powell AJ (1989) A treadmill-mounted force platform. J Appl Physiol 67:1692–1698
Kyröläinen H, Avela J, Komi PV (2005) Changes in muscle activity with increasing running
speed. J Sports Sci 23:1101–1109
Lakomy HKA (1987) The use of a non-motorized treadmill for analysing sprint performance.
Ergonomics 30:627–637
Mann R, Sprague P (1980) A kinetic analysis of the ground leg during sprint running. Res Q Exerc
Sport 51:334–348
Marey EJ (2002) Le mouvement, Editions J. Chambon
McKenna M, Riches PE (2007) A comparison of sprinting kinematics on two types of treadmill
and over-ground. Scand J Med Sci Sport 17:649–655
Morin J-B, Petrakos G, Jimenez-Reyes P et al (2016) Very-heavy sled training for improving
horizontal force output in soccer players. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 1–13
Morin J-B, Belli A (2004) A simple method for measurement of maximal downstroke power on
friction-loaded cycle ergometer. J Biomech 37:141–145
Morin J-B, Bourdin M, Edouard P et al (2012) Mechanical determinants of 100-m sprint running
performance. Eur J Appl Physiol 112:3921–3930
Morin J-B, Edouard P, Samozino P (2011a) Technical ability of force application as a determinant
factor of sprint performance. Med Sci Sport Exerc 43:1680–1688
Morin J-B, Gimenez P, Edouard P et al (2015a) Sprint acceleration mechanics: the major role of
hamstrings in horizontal force production. Front Physiol 6:e404
Morin JB, Samozino P, Bonnefoy R et al (2010) Direct measurement of power during one single
sprint on treadmill. J Biomech 43:1970–1975. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.03.012
Morin J-B, Samozino P, Edouard P, Tomazin K (2011b) Effect of fatigue on force production and
force application technique during repeated sprints. J Biomech 44:2719–2723
Morin J-B, Samozino P, Millet GY (2011c) Changes in running kinematics, kinetics, and
spring-mass behavior over a 24-h run. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43:829–836
Morin J-B, Samozino P, Zameziati K, Belli A (2007) Effects of altered stride frequency and
contact time on leg-spring behavior in human running. J Biomech 40:3341–3348
Morin J-B, Sève P (2011) Sprint running performance: comparison between treadmill and ﬁeld
conditions. Eur J Appl Physiol 111:1695–1703
10
The Measurement of Sprint Mechanics …
235


<!-- Page 237 -->
Morin J-B, Slawinski J, Dorel S et al (2015b) Acceleration capability in elite sprinters and ground
impulse: push more, brake less? J Biomech 48:3149–3154
Nagahara R, Mizutani M, Matsuo A et al (2017) Association of step width with accelerated
sprinting performance and ground reaction force. Int J Sports Med 38:534–540
Nelson RC, Dillman CJ, Lagasse P, Bickett P (1972) Biomechanics of overground versus treadmill
running. Med Sci Sports 4:233–240
Nigg BM, De Boer RW, Fisher V (1995) A kinematic comparison of overground and treadmill
running. Med Sci Sports Exerc 27:98–105
Rabita G, Dorel S, Slawinski J et al (2015) Sprint mechanics in world-class athletes: a new insight
into the limits of human locomotion. Scand J Med Sci Sports 25:583–594
Riley PO, Dicharry J, Franz J et al (2008) A kinematics and kinetic comparison of overground and
treadmill running. Med Sci Sports Exerc 40:1093–1100
Schache AG, Blanch PD, Rath DA et al (2001) A comparison of overground and treadmill running
for measuring the three-dimensional kinematics of the lumbo-pelvic-hip complex. Clin
Biomech 16:667–680
Schache AG, Brown NAT, Pandy MG (2015) Modulation of work and power by the human
lower-limb joints with increasing steady-state locomotion speed. J Exp Biol 218:2472–2481
Schache AG, Dorn TW, Williams GP et al (2014) Lower-limb muscular strategies for increasing
running speed. J Orthop Sport Phys Ther 44:813–824
Simonsen EB, Thomsen L, Klausen K (1985) Activity of mono- and biarticular leg muscles during
sprint running. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 54:524–532
Sun Y, Wei S, Zhong Y et al (2015) How joint torques affect hamstring injury risk in sprinting
swing-stance transition. Med Sci Sports Exerc 47:373–380
Tomazin K, Morin J-B, Strojnik V et al (2012) Fatigue after short (100-m), medium (200-m) and
long (400-m) treadmill sprints. Eur J Appl Physiol 112:1027–1036
van Ingen Schenau GJ (1980) Some fundamental aspects of the biomechanics of overground
versus treadmill locomotion. Med Sci Sports Exerc 12:257–261
Weyand PG, Sandell RF, Prime DNL, Bundle MW (2010) The biological limits to running speed
are imposed from the ground up. J Appl Physiol 108:950–961
Weyand PG, Sternlight DB, Bellizzi MJ, Wright S (2000) Faster top running speeds are achieved
with greater ground forces not more rapid leg movements. J Appl Physiol 89:1991–1999
236
J.-B. Morin et al.

