# Chapter 11: A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity and Power During Sprint Running


<!-- Page 238 -->
Chapter 11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force,
Velocity and Power Capabilities
and Mechanical Effectiveness During
Sprint Running
Pierre Samozino
Abstract A macroscopic view of sprint mechanics during an acceleration phase,
and notably athlete’s propulsion capacities, can be given by Force-velocity (F-v)
and Power-velocity (P-v) relationships. They characterize the change in athlete’s
maximal horizontal force and power production capabilities when running speed
increases and directly determine sprint acceleration performance. This chapter
presents an accurate and reliable simple method to determine these mechanical
capabilities during sprinting. This method, based on a macroscopic biomechanical
model and validated in laboratory conditions in comparison to force plate mea-
surements, is very convenient for ﬁeld use since it only requires anthropometric
(body mass and stature) and spatio-temporal (split times or instantaneous velocity)
input variables. It provides different information on athlete’s horizontal force pro-
duction capabilities: maximal power output, maximal horizontal force, maximal
velocity until which horizontal force can be produced and mechanical effectiveness
of force application onto the ground. This information presents interesting practical
applications for sport practitioners to individualize training focusing on sprint
acceleration performance, but also perspectives in injury management. This chapter
presents different examples of such applications. Moreover, this simple method can
also help to bring new insight into the limits of human locomotion since it makes
possible to estimate sprinting mechanical properties of the fastest men and women
without testing them in a laboratory.
P. Samozino (&)
Laboratoire Inter-universitaire de Biologie de la Motricité,
Université de Savoie Mont Blanc, Campus Scientiﬁque,
73000 Le Bourget du Lac, Chambéry, France
e-mail: pierre.samozino@univ-smb.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_11
237


<!-- Page 239 -->
11.1
Introduction
The previous chapter presented recent innovative concepts and measurement
methodologies to explore, evaluate and better understand mechanics of sprinting.
A macroscopic view of the sprint mechanics during an acceleration phase, and
notably the athlete’s propulsion capacities, can be given by Force-velocity (F-v) and
Power-velocity (P-v) relationships. These relationships characterize the change in
athlete’s maximal horizontal force and power production capabilities when running
speed increases. These capabilities directly determine athlete’s forward accelera-
tion, which is a key factor of performance in many sport activities, not only to reach
the highest top velocity, but also and most importantly to cover a given distance in
the shortest time possible, be it in track and ﬁeld events or in team sports (see
previous chapter).
As previously described for other movements (pedaling, squat jumps, bench
press), these relationships allow the determination of key mechanical variables
being complex integration of the different physiological, neural and biomechanical
mechanisms involved in the total external force production and characterizing
different athlete’s muscle abilities. However, in contrast to acyclic ballistic
push-offs (e.g. squat jumps, Chaps. 4 and 5), F-v and P-v relationships in sprint
running are speciﬁc to running acceleration propulsion and in turn also integrate the
ability to apply the external force effectively (i.e. horizontally in the antero-posterior
direction) onto the ground (Morin et al. 2011a, b, 2012; Rabita et al. 2015). The
technical ability of force application during sprint running and its implication in
sprinting performance has been well presented and detailed in the previous chapter
(see Chap. 10, Sect. 10.3.3). F-v and P-v relationships provide thus an objective
quantiﬁcation of the maximal power output an athlete can develop in the horizontal
direction (Pmax, power capabilities), the theoretical maximal horizontal force an
athlete could produce onto the ground (F0, force capabilities) and the theoretical
maximal velocity at which he/she could run if there is no external constraints to
overcome (v0, velocity capabilities). The latter can be also interpreted as the
maximal running velocity until which the athlete is still able to produce positive net
horizontal force, which well represents his/her ability to produce horizontal force at
high running velocities. As for the other movements, force and velocity capabilities
in sprint are independent and do not refer to the same physical and technical
abilities. The ratio between both corresponds to athlete’s F-v proﬁle (SFv). These
different mechanical variables integrate athlete’s “physical” qualities (lower limb
muscle force production capacities) and “technical” abilities (mechanical effec-
tiveness of force application). The latter can be computed at each step by the ratio of
horizontal to total force (RF). Mechanical effectiveness can so be well described by
the maximal value of RF observed at the ﬁrst step (RFmax) and its rate of decrease
when velocity increases (DRF). Quantifying individually the mechanical effective-
ness can help to distinguish the physical and technical origins of inter or
intra-individual differences in both Force-velocity-Power (FvP) mechanical proﬁles
238
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 240 -->
and sprint performances, which can be useful to more appropriately orient the
training process towards the speciﬁc mechanical qualities to develop.
As presented in the previous chapter, different methodologies have been pro-
posed to assess all these mechanical variables characterizing sprint propulsion
capabilities. Brieﬂy, the ﬁrst ones in the nineties used motorized or non-motorized
speciﬁc treadmills of whom the belt was accelerated by the athlete and required
several 6-s sprints against different loads to determine FvP relationships from peak
velocity (Jaskolska et al. 1999; Jaskolski et al. 1996; Chelly and Denis 2001). Then,
in 2010, a single sprint method was validated in our lab using a dynamometric
treadmill and foot-ground contact phase averaged values to compute the different
relationships and mechanical variables (Morin et al. 2010, 2011a). Few years later,
to respond to the criticisms on treadmill measurements for sprinting evaluations
(non-natural movement due to waist attachment, a belt narrower than a typical track
lane, the impossibility to use starting block, the need to set a default torque), we
collaborated with colleagues of the French National Institute of Sport to propose
and validate a method to measure ground reaction force over an entire sprint
acceleration phase from 5 sprints overground and a 6.6-m force plate system, since
to date no 30- to 60-m long force plate systems exist (Rabita et al. 2015). This
allowed, for the ﬁrst time, to provide the data to entirely characterize the mechanics
of overground sprint acceleration. These different laboratory methodologies, each
of them presenting advantage and inconvenient, present very accurate and reliable
measurements of the different mechanical propulsion qualities (force, velocity and
power capabilities). However, sport practitioners do not have easy access to such
expensive and rare devices, and often do not have the technical expertise to process
the raw force data measured. In the best cases, this forces athletes to report to a
laboratory. This explains that, although very accurate and potentially useful for
training purposes, this kind of evaluation has almost been never performed.
Consequently, sport scientists investigating sprint mechanics and performance
usually assess, at best, only very few steps of a sprint (e.g. Kawamori et al. 2014;
Lockie et al. 2013). Sport practitioners do not explore kinetic variables, i.e. athlete’s
force and power production, but only their consequences on movement, i.e. kine-
matic parameters (e.g. split times or distances covered in a given time). The
exploration of sprint performance in ﬁeld conditions through kinematic analyses of
the horizontal displacement of the body center of mass has already been proposed in
1920s by Furusawa, Hill and colleagues. They used a magnet carried by the athlete
which induced an electrical current each time the athlete runs in front of coils of
wire connected to a galvanometer placed at given distances in parallel to the track
(Fig. 11.1, Furusawa et al. 1927). Another ingenious device was used later in 1954
by Henry who equipped a track (on the roof of a building) with several timing
contact gates allowing to measure times with an accuracy of 0.01 s (Fig. 11.1,
Henry 1954). These were the ancestors of current photocells or high speed cameras
giving the different split times during a sprint acceleration phase. In parallel to time
measurements, instantaneous speed assessments can be done out of labs using radar
or laser guns which measure athlete positions at very high sample rates
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
239


<!-- Page 241 -->
(from 30 to 100 Hz). Even if kinematic variables provide very interesting infor-
mation on sprint performance, they do not give insights about the athlete’s force
and power production capabilities nor about the distinction between “physical” and
“technical” abilities. Typical examples will be presented at the end of this chapter to
show the interest of kinetic assessments in addition to kinematic ones.
A simple method for determining F-v and P-v relationships and force application
effectiveness during sprint running in overground realistic conditions, out of the lab,
and from only one single sprint, seems to be therefore very interesting to generalize
sprint mechanics evaluations for training or scientiﬁc purposes. This chapter will
present a simple ﬁeld method we proposed to compute accurately force, velocity
and power lower limb capabilities from few data inputs that are easy to obtain in
typical training practice. The validation protocol and results, limitations and prac-
tical applications will then be presented and discussed.
11.2
Theoretical Bases and Equations
As for the other simple methods presented in this book, the simple sprint method for
measuring force, velocity and power capabilities during sprint running is based on
the fundamental principles of dynamics applied to the body center of mass
(CM) (for more details, see Samozino et al. 2016). The biomechanical model used
here is an analysis of kinematics and kinetics of the runner’s CM during sprint
acceleration using a macroscopic inverse dynamics approach aiming to be the
Fig. 11.1 Main devices used in the past and at the moment to analyse sprint kinematics out of
labs
240
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 242 -->
simplest possible (Helene and Yamashita 2010; Furusawa et al. 1927; di Prampero
et al. 2015). In this approach, as for the previous ones, mechanical variables are
modeled over time, without considering intra-step changes, and thus corresponds to
step-averaged values (contact plus aerial times).
During a running maximal acceleration, let us consider the different external
forces applied to the athlete’s CM: the body weight, the aerodynamic resistive
forces and the ground reaction force (GRF) with its horizontal and vertical com-
ponents (Fig. 11.2). Applying the fundamental laws of dynamics in the horizontal
direction, the net horizontal antero-posterior GRF (FH) applied to the body CM can
be modeled over time as:
FH tð Þ ¼ m.aH tð Þ þ Faero tð Þ
ð11:1Þ
with m the runner’s body mass (in kg), aH tð Þ the CM horizontal acceleration and
Faero(t) the aerodynamic drag to overcome during sprint running. Basic computa-
tional ﬂuid dynamics principles show that Faero(t) is proportional to the square of
the velocity of air relative to the runner and can be modelled as:
Faero tð Þ ¼ k. vH tð Þ  vw
ð
Þ2
ð11:2Þ
with vw the wind velocity (if any) and k the runner’s aerodynamic friction coefﬁ-
cient. The latter can be estimated from values of air density (q, in kg m−3), frontal
area of the runner (Af; in m2), and drag coefﬁcient (Cd = 0.9, van Ingen Schenau
et al. 1991) as proposed by Arsac and Locatelli (2002):
Fig. 11.2 Schematic representation of the external forces applied to a sprinter during his
acceleration phase: body weight (mg), aerodynamic resistive force (Faero) and vertical (FV) and
horizontal (FH) components of the ground reaction force
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
241


<!-- Page 243 -->
k ¼ 0:5:q.Af .Cd
ð11:3Þ
with
q ¼ q0. Pb
760 .
273
273 þ T
ð11:4Þ
Af ¼ 0:2025:h0:725.m0:425


:0:266
ð11:5Þ
where q0 ¼ 1:293 kg m−1 is the q at 760 Torr and 273K, Pb is the barometric
pressure (in Torr), T° is the air temperature (in °C) and h is the runner’s stature
(in m).
To sum up, beyond to know the athlete’s stature and body mass, as well as
approximations of ambient temperature and barometric pressure (which have only
negligible incidences on mechanical output, see Sect. 11.3), aH tð Þ is the only
required kinematic input variable to model FH.
During a running maximal acceleration, horizontal velocity (vH) systematically
increases following a mono-exponential function. This can be observed for recre-
ational athletes, team sport players, the best sprinter of all time, a young 4-year old
boy or a 95-year old man and have been shown many times in scientiﬁc literature
(Fig. 11.3, (e.g. Furusawa et al. 1927; di Prampero et al. 2005; Morin et al. 2006;
Chelly and Denis 2001):
vH tð Þ ¼ vHmax. 1  et=s


ð11:6Þ
with vHmax the maximal velocity reached at the end of the acceleration and s the
acceleration time constant. After integration and derivation of vH tð Þ over time, the
Fig. 11.3 Velocity-time curves obtained during sprinting acceleration of a 2-year old young boy,
a world class athlete and a 95-year old man. The noisy lines correspond to the radar gun data and
the solid smoothed lines represent the mono-exponential model function. The differences in
magnitudes of noise in the radar signals are independent from the age or level of the individual, but
is associated to different ﬁlters applied on these typical raw data
242
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 244 -->
horizontal position xH
ð
Þ and acceleration aH
ð
Þ of the body CM as a function of time
during the acceleration phase can be expressed as follows:
x tð Þ ¼ vHmax. t þ s.et
s


 vHmax:s
ð11:7Þ
aH tð Þ ¼
vHmax
s


.et
s
ð11:8Þ
Consequently, vHmax and s values can be determined from velocity or position/
time measurements and using least square regression method and Eq. 11.6 or 11.7.
Then, aH tð Þ can be computed at each instant (for instance, every 0.1 or 0.05 s)
using Eq. 11.8, FH can be obtained using Eq. 11.1 and vH using Eq. 11.6 [if the
initial measurement is x tð Þ]. The mean net horizontal antero-posterior power output
applied to the body CM (PH in W) can then be modelled at each instant as the
product of FH and vH. Plotting FH versus vH and modeling this relationship by a
linear equation gives the F-v relationship which can be extrapolated to obtain the
maximal force (F0) and velocity (v0) values as the intercept with the force- and
velocity-axis, respectively (Fig. 11.4). The P-v relationship can be obtained using a
2nd order polynomial regression on PH-vH plot, the apex of the latter corresponding
to the maximal power output ðPHmaxÞ.
Then, applying the fundamental laws of dynamics in the vertical direction, the
mean net vertical component of GRF (FV) applied to the body CM over each
complete step can be modeled over time as equal to body weight (di Prampero et al.
2015):
FV tð Þ ¼ m.g
ð11:9Þ
where g is the gravitational acceleration (9.81 m s−2).
The ratio of force (RF in %) can be modeled at each instant by:
RF ¼
FH
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
F2
H þ F2
V
p
:100
ð11:10Þ
After plotting RF versus vH with a linear regression, the slope of this relationship
corresponds to the rate of decrease in RF when velocity increases over the entire
acceleration phase (DRF, in % s m−1). It is worth noting that, since the starting
block phase (push-off and following aerial time) lasts between 0.5 and 0.6 s
(Slawinski et al. 2010; Rabita et al. 2015) and so occurs at an averaged time of
*0.3 s, RF and DRF can be reasonably computed from FH and FV values modeled
for t > 0.3 s.
The biomechanical model and associated equations presented here allows the
estimation of GRFs in the sagittal plane of motion during one single sprint running
acceleration from simple inputs: anthropometric (body mass and stature) and
spatiotemporal (split times or instantaneous running velocity) data. This model can
then be used as a simple method to evaluate force, velocity and power capabilities
and mechanical effectiveness during sprint running.
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
243


<!-- Page 245 -->
Fig. 11.4 Modelled changes in horizontal velocity (vH), horizontal antero-posterior force (FH) and
power (PH) over time during the acceleration phase of a sprint, and associated modelled force- and
power-velocity relationships with maximal force (F0), velocity (v0) and power (PHmax)
11.3
Limits of the Method
The biomechanical model presented in the previous section is a simple application
of the basic principles of dynamics. However, as for all models, some simplifying
assumptions have been required to model the horizontal force developed by the
runner onto the ground during the entire sprint acceleration phase. Moreover, the
macroscopic level of the model (kinematics and kinetics of the body CM) induces
some limits in the level of analysis possible with this approach, which has to be
considered for the interpretation of output variables. These different points are
following discussed.
• The dynamics principles were applied to a whole body considered as a system
and represented by its centre of mass (e.g. Samozino et al. 2008, 2010, 2012;
244
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 246 -->
Cavagna et al. 1971; van Ingen Schenau et al. 1991; Helene and Yamashita
2010; Rabita et al. 2015). Only the forces aiming at moving the CM were
considered.
• The biomechanical model only focuses on GRF components in the sagittal plane
of motion (i.e. vertical and antero-posterior) and neglects the medio-lateral
component which was shown to constitute a negligible part in the total force
produced by athletes (Rabita et al. 2015).
• The horizontal aerodynamic friction coefﬁcient
k
ð Þ was proposed to be esti-
mated from only stature, body mass and a ﬁxed drag coefﬁcient (Arsac and
Locatelli 2002). Even if it does not represent the “gold standard” process, this
represents a very simple method to estimate the aerodynamic resistive force out
of laboratory. Moreover, the sensibility of the mechanical output variables to a
likely error in the estimation of frontal area, air density or drag coefﬁcient is low:
a *10% error in these input estimations leads to an error lower than 0.5% in the
output variables.
• In contrast with previous kinetic measurements during sprint running which
averaged mechanical variables over each support phase (Morin et al. 2010,
2011a, 2012; Lockie et al. 2013; Rabita et al. 2015; Kawamori et al. 2014),
computations lead here to modelled values over complete steps, i.e. contact plus
aerial
times,
which
induces
lower
values
of force
or
power
output.
Step-averaged variables characterize more the mechanics of the overall sprint
running propulsion than speciﬁcally the mechanical capabilities of lower limb
neuromuscular system during each contact phase. However, this does not affect
RF (and in turn DRF) values since it is a ratio between two force components
averaged over the same duration. Note that such values modeled over complete
steps cannot bring information about inter-step variability, intra-step analyses or
explorations of contact and aerial times, step length/frequency and force impulse
and rate of development during sprint running.
• Mechanical effectiveness computations required to model GRF vertical com-
ponent over each step as equal to the runner’s body weight. This required the
assumption of a quasi-null CM vertical acceleration over the acceleration phase
of the sprint. However, be it with or without using starting blocks (but largely
more pronounced with starting blocks), the runner’s body CM goes up during
this phase from the starting crouched position to the standing running position,
and then does not change from one complete step to another. Since the initial
upward movement of the CM is overall smoothed through a relative long time/
distance (*20–40 m, Cavagna et al. 1971; Slawinski et al. 2010), we can
consider that it does not require any large vertical acceleration, and so that the
mean net vertical acceleration of the CM over each step is quasi null throughout
the sprint acceleration phase. This is even more correct for standing sprint starts
which represents the most of the cases in sport other than track and ﬁeld sprint
events using starting blocks.
The above-mentioned simplifying assumptions are those inherent of all biome-
chanical models. The important thing is to quantify the errors induced by these
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
245


<!-- Page 247 -->
simpliﬁcations. For that purpose, the simple method based on these computations
and on simple anthropometric and spatiotemporal measurements was validated in
comparison to the reference force plate measurements.
11.4
Validation of the Method
The validity and the reliability of the simple sprint method presented in this chapter
were tested through two different experimental protocols reported in details in
Samozino et al. (2016).
11.4.1
Concurrent Validity Compared to Force Plate
Measurements
The concurrent validity of the simple method was tested by comparison of modelled
mechanical values obtained using the proposed computations to reference force
plate measurements during an entire acceleration phase of a sprint.
Reference method. Antero-posterior and vertical GRF components, F-v, P-v
and RF-v relationships and associated variables
F0, v0, PHmax, SFV, DRF
ð
Þ were
determined for nine elite or sub-elite sprinters using both the simple method and the
method using a 6.60-m long force platform system (KI 9067; Kistler, Winterthur,
Switzerland, sampling rate of 1000 Hz) recently proposed by Rabita et al. (2015),
more details in Chap. 10). Brieﬂy, since no 30- to 60-m long force plate systems
existed, this method consisted in virtually reconstruct for each athlete the GRF
signal of an entire single 40-m sprint acceleration by setting differently for each
sprint the position of the starting blocks relatively to the 6.60-m long force platform
system. So each athlete performed, after a standardized 45 min warm-up, 7 max-
imal sprints in an indoor stadium (2  10 m, 2  15 m, 20 m, 30 m and 40 m
with 4 min rest between each trial). During each sprint, GRF data were collected
over the 6.60 m section covered by the force plate system, the latter being placed at
different positions of the acceleration phase for each sprint. Instantaneous data of
vertical (FV) and horizontal antero-posterior (FH) GRF components were averaged
for each step (contact + aerial phase) to compute the above-mentioned variables.
Simple method. In parallel to force plate measurements, sprint times were
measured with a pair of photocells (Microgate, Bolzano, Italy) located at the ﬁnish
line of the different sprints. The 5 split times at 10 (best one of the two trials), 15
(idem), 20, 30 and 40 m were then used to determine vHmax and s using Eq. 11.7 and
least square regression method. From these two parameters, vH tð Þ and aH tð Þ were
modelled over time (every 0.1 s) using Eqs. 11.6 and 11.8, respectively. From
aH tð Þ, FH tð Þ, PH tð Þ and RF(t) were computed using equations and data processing
presented in Sect. 11.2 in order to determine all the mechanical variables for each
subject.
246
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 248 -->
Results showed that modeled force (FH, FV, resultant), power and RF values
were very close to values measured by force plates at each step with low standard
errors of estimate of *30–50N, *230W and 3.7%, respectively (as shown for a
typical subject in Fig. 11.5). Over the ﬁrst 20–30 m, FV values measured with force
plates were not particularly higher than body weight (Fig. 11.5) and were very close
to body weight when averaged over the entire acceleration phase (difference lower
than *2.40% in average). This supports the assumption of a quasi-null vertical
acceleration of the CM over this phase (despite the use of starting blocks), and in
turn supports the validity of step averaged FV modelled values as equal to body
weight. Beyond the very good agreement in the modeled GRF in the sagittal plane
of motion (horizontal, vertical and resultant) during sprint running acceleration, low
bias in the determination of F0, v0, PHmax, SFV and DRF were observed: lower than
*5% for F0, v0 and PHmax; and lower than 8% for SFV and DRF (Table 11.1). These
low bias were associated to narrowed 95% agreement limits crossing 0, which
support the high accuracy and validity of the proposed simple method to determine
F-v, P-v and RF-v relationships and their associated mechanical variables
PHmax; F0; v0; SFV; DRF
ð
Þ in sprint running (Fig. 11.6).
Fig. 11.5 Changes over the acceleration phase in horizontal velocity (vH, black points), horizontal
(FH, open diamonds) and vertical (FV, grey diamonds) force components, horizontal power output
(PHmax, black diamonds), and ratio of force (RF, open circles) for a typical sprinter. Points represent
averaged values over each step obtained from force plate method (from ﬁve sprints) and lines
represent modelled values computed by the simple sprint method from split times
Table 11.1 Mean ± SD values of variables attesting the concurrent validity of the simple sprint
method
Reference
method
Proposed
method
Bias
95% agreement
limits
Absolute
bias
F0 (N)
654 ± 80
638 ± 84
−15.9 ± 25.7
[−66.3;34.5]
3.74 ± 2.69
v0 (m.s−1)
10.20 ± 0.36
10.51 ± 0.74
0.32 ± 0.52
[−0.7;1.3]
4.77 ± 3.26
PHmax (W)
1669 ± 253
1680 ± 280
10.56 ± 45.01
[−77.7;98.8]
1.88 ± 1.88
SFV
(N s m−1)
−64.06 ± 6.30
−60.8 ± 7.71
3.26 ± 5.22
[−6.97;13.49]
7.93 ± 5.32
DRF
(% s m−1)
−6.80 ± 0.28
−6.80 ± 0.74
−0.002 ± 0.58
[−1.139;1.135]
6.04 ± 5.70
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
247


<!-- Page 249 -->
The kinematic input variables of the present simple method are spatio-temporal
data: split times (as used in the validation protocol) or instantaneous running
velocity measurements (as could be obtained from radar guns, (e.g. di Prampero
et al. 2005; Morin et al. 2006), or laser beams, (e.g. Bezodis et al. 2012) during one
single sprint. So, the simple sprint method was also tested during the same protocol
from
data
measured
using
a
radar
(Stalker
ATS
System,
Radar
Sales,
Minneapolis MN, USA, 46.875 Hz) during the best sprints of the 30- and 40-m
trials. Results were very similar to those obtained from split times, with slightly
higher bias values (absolute bias from 3 to 7%) due the fact that the comparison was
made between mechanical variables obtained from one single sprint using the
simple method and data obtained from 5 sprints with the reference method. This
could have added a bias that would have only been associated to the validation
protocol itself, and not to the method.
11.4.2
Reliability
The inter-trial reliability of the simple method was tested in a second protocol
during which six high-level sprinters performed three maximal 50-m sprints with
10 min
of
rest
between
each
trial.
The
different
mechanical
variables
F0; v0; SFV; PHmax and DRF were obtained with the same data processing as presented
before for the proposed computation method, except that vHmax and s were deter-
mined using Eq. 11.6, least square regression method and vH tð Þ measured by the
radar system (sample rate 46.875 Hz). The latter was placed on a tripod 10 m
behind the subjects at a height of 1 m corresponding approximately to the height of
subjects’ CM (di Prampero et al. 2005; Morin et al. 2012). For all the mechanical
variables, low coefﬁcients of variation between the two best trials and standard
errors of measurement were observed (<5%, Table 11.2) and were associated to
change in the mean close to 0. This showed low systematic and random errors, and
in turn high test-to-test reliability.
Fig. 11.6 Force- power- and RF-velocity relationships obtained by both methods for a typical
athlete. Filled diamonds represent averaged values over each step obtained from force plate
method, solid lines the associated regressions, and grey lines the modelled values computed by the
proposed simple method confounded with the associated regressions (dashed lines)
248
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 250 -->
Through this study (Samozino et al. 2016), we clearly show that the simple method
based on a macroscopic biomechanical model and only anthropometric (body mass
and stature) and spatio-temporal (split times or instantaneous velocity) variables easy
to obtain out oflaboratory,isaccurate,reliable and valid to evaluate force, velocity and
power capabilities, as well as mechanical effectiveness, during sprint running.
11.5
Technologies and Input Measurements
As for the different simple methods presented in this book, the accuracy and reli-
ability of the present simple sprint method depends on the accuracy of the devices
used to obtain the mechanical inputs of the model, i.e. the position-time or
velocity-time data here. Note that body mass has to be measured with shoes and
clothes used during the tests.
11.5.1
Split Times
When using split times as input data of the simple sprint method (using Eq. 11.7),
as it was done in the above-described validation protocol, at least 4 or 5 split times
are required over the acceleration phase to obtain reliable mechanical output
variables. According to the level of the athletes, the distances associated to the
different split times would be different in order to cover all the acceleration phase:
from start line to 30 m (for non-expert sprinters), until to 50–60 m (for track and
ﬁeld sprinters). These distances have to be shorter at the beginning than at the end
of the acceleration phase since the higher the acceleration magnitude (and so in the
ﬁrst meters of the sprint), the higher the number of split time needed to well
describe the change in motion velocity. For instance, for soccer or rugby players,
split times should be at 5, 10, 15, 20 and 30 m. For 100-m sprinters, they could be
at 5, 10, 15, 30 and 40 m. Different devices can be used in ﬁeld conditions to
measure split times during a sprint acceleration, the main of them are presented
here.
Table 11.2 Mean ± SD of the coefﬁcient of variation (CV), change in the mean and standard
error of measurement between the 2 best trials
CV (%)
Change in the mean
Standard error of measurement (%)
F0 (N)
2.93 ± 2.00
−1.53 ± 32.2
3.57
v0 (m s−1)
1.11 ± 0.86
−0.171 ± 0.776
1.40
Pmax (W)
1.87 ± 1.36
−0.167 ± 0.66
2.33
SFV (N s m−1)
4.04 ± 2.72
−0.20 ± 4.18
4.94
DRF
(% s m−1)
3.99 ± 2.80
−0.110 ± 0.45
4.86
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
249


<!-- Page 251 -->
Fully automatic timing systems. The gold standard device to measure accu-
rately and reliably split times during sprints is the fully automatic timing systems
including silent gun and photo-ﬁnish camera (Haugen and Buchheit 2016). They
present timing resolution up to 0.0005 s and are mostly and quasi only used in
international athletics competition. They are too expensive and impractical for sport
practitioners and scientists. However, since the 1987 World Championships in
Rome, the International Association of Athletics Federations (IAAF) has provided
biomechanics reports presenting split times for each 10- or 20-m sections for the
100-m race in both men and women. Analysing these data, combined those
obtained during individual World Record races or Olympic Games, with the
above-presented simple computations has recently allowed us to explore the
mechanical determinants of 100-m sprint running performance in the world’s fastest
men and women, and so the limits of human sprinting performance (Slawinski et al.
2017, see Sect. 11.6.3). Since a sprint acceleration actually starts when the force
production on the ground ﬁrstly rises, the reaction time has to be removed from the
different split times to consider only the CM kinematics (and not the global 100-m
sprint performance) to estimate kinetics variables.
Photocells. In sprint testing or training, photocells are the most used system to
measure split times usually with a resolution of 1 ms. Different photocell timing
systems exist with different methods to start the timer: a pair of cells placed just
(20–50 cm) in front of the athlete positioned on the starting line, a ﬁnger pod on the
ﬂoor under the thumb for three-point starts or foot pod under the back foot (Haugen
and Buchheit 2016). As mentioned before, to use split times as input in the simple
sprint method, they have to be measured from the ﬁrst force production on the
ground. We determined that the best method to estimate these split times is to add
0.1 s to split times measured with athletes using a three-point crouching starting
position and with photocells using a ﬁnger pod on the ﬂoor under the thumb to start
the timer. This 0.1 s time delay was quantiﬁed on several sprinters using force plate
and high speed camera (Samozino et al. 2016). Other methods, for instance using a
pair of photocells placed just in front of the starting line, would overestimate force
and power output computed by the simple method, even if reliability remains very
good if photocells are always set at the same place over the different testing
sessions.
High speed cameras. With the multiplication and generalization of high-speed
cameras presenting high pixel resolutions and high frame rates (up to 240 frames
per second in the very recent smartphone and tab), measuring split times using
video provides accurate enough information to compute reliably mechanical vari-
ables from the simple sprint method. The higher the frame rate, the higher the
accuracy. We think that the frame rate has to be at least 100 frames per second to
obtain relevant outcomes. To obtain split times from video analysis, it requires to
position several markers on the track at the 4–5 different distances and determine
times when athletes cross the markers with their hip or shoulders. This can be done
using a travelling camera moving at the same velocity as the athlete to ﬁlm the
sprint from the side or using a ﬁxed camera placed at a given distance from the track
at the marker positioned at the half of the acceleration targeted distance (i.e. at 15 or
250
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 252 -->
20 m for a 30- or 40-m acceleration, respectively). In the latter case, video parallax
was corrected to ensure the different split times are measured properly when ath-
letes cross the different targeted distances. A simple methods for parallax correction
is
proposed, detailed
and
illustrated
in
Romero-Franco
et
al.
(Fig. 1 in
Romero-Franco et al. 2016). As for photocells, the critical point is the criterion
considered to start the timer, i.e. to determine the frame corresponding to the start of
the sprint which corresponds, from a mechanical point of view, of the beginning of
the force production. We proposed to make athletes start with a three-point starting
position, to consider the frame at which the thumb leaves the ground as the frame 0,
and then add 0.1 s at each split time. Recently, a smartphone application
(MySprint) was designed by Pedro Jimenez-Reyes to compute all the sprint
mechanical variables using the computations of present simple sprint method and
split times measured with the 240-fps camera of recent iPhones or Ipad (Fig. 11.7).
Performance inputs (split times and velocity-time curves) and mechanical outputs
(horizontal force and power, mechanical effectiveness) showed very high reliability
(ICC > 0.99) and concurrent validity (standard error of estimate <1.3%) compared
to reference devices (photocells and radar) (Romero-Franco et al. 2016). In our
opinion, this low cost system (Iphone/Ipad + MySprint App) represents nowadays
the best compromise between cost, validity/accuracy/reliability, direct feedback
data, and ease to use and to carry on ﬁeld.
11.5.2
Instantaneous Velocity
Instantaneous velocity can also be used as input data of the simple sprint method
and lead to similar concurrent validity in the estimation of mechanical variables
characterizing force production during sprint acceleration (Samozino et al. 2016).
Here are the main used devices to obtain velocity signal over time during such an
all-out effort.
Laser and radar guns. Instantaneous velocity can be obtained using laser (e.g.
LAVEG Sport laser speed gun, Jenoptik, Jena, Germany) or radar (e.g. Stalker ATS
radar gun, Radar Sales, Minneapolis, MN, USA) systems which presents sampling
rates of 100 and 46.875 Hz, respectively, high reliability and validity (Haugen and
Buchheit 2016). Both of these guns are typically positioned 3–10 m behind the
athletes at the starting line at a height of 1 m (corresponding approximately to the
height of subjects’ centre of mass). For data analysis, only the acceleration phase is
required to compute vHmax and s using an exponential regression (Eq. 11.6). So, all
velocity values measured before the actual sprint start and after the maximal
velocity plateau have to be deleted (Fig. 11.8). Contrary to split times for which
each data depends on measurement triggering, instantaneous velocity values are
independent from the previous ones, which avoids any bias due to the instant or the
way the measurement is started. However, the detection of the actual sprint start on
velocity data is often compromised by noise on the velocity signal due to
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
251


<!-- Page 253 -->
Fig. 11.7 The iPhone app “Mysprint” uses the high-speed video slow motion mode (frame rate of
240 fps) to measure the split times of a 30-m sprint acceleration, and thus compute all
Force-velocity-Power proﬁle and mechanical effectiveness variables
252
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 254 -->
Fig. 11.8 Typical data analysis when instantaneous velocity is measured by radar gun during a
sprint acceleration. The ﬁrst step is to delete uncertain raw velocity values for which there is a
doubt between actual signal and noise at the start of the sprint and values after the maximal
velocity plateau at the end of the sprint. Then, the raw values can be modelled using the
mono-exponential regression including a time delay (Dt) in the equation
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
253


<!-- Page 255 -->
movements of other things in the gun ﬁeld of measurement just before the sprint
start. If the ﬁrst non-null velocity values considered is not the actual ﬁrst one (i.e.
athlete’s velocity), this could lead to overestimations of force and power variables.
To face to this issue, we suggested to delete all the values for which there is a doubt
between actual signal and noise, and then add a third parameter (a time delay, Dt, in
s) to the mathematical exponential function in order to associate the ﬁrst velocity
value considered to the true time (Fig. 11.8). Including Dt in the Eq. 11.6 gives:
vH tð Þ ¼ vHmax. 1  e tDt
ð
Þ=s


ð11:11Þ
This data analysis method allows to improve the reliability and validity of
velocity values, and associated computed distance and acceleration data, measured
in the ﬁrst 5–10 m of the acceleration phase (see Sect. 11.4), which was previously
shown to be an issue for these devices (Haugen and Buchheit 2016; Bezodis et al.
2012). For instance, this time delay was not included in our computations for one of
our ﬁrst studies using this method (Buchheit et al. 2014b): F0 showed acceptable
absolute (CV 7.8%), but not relative reliability (ICC, 0.64) (Simperingham et al.
2016; Buchheit et al. 2014b). After using this time delay, reliability was highly
improved (Samozino et al. 2016).
Global positioning systems. Global positioning system (GPS) devices have
become popular in large-ﬁeld ball sports for assessing players’ physical activity
during competition or training (Aughey 2011). Their validity and reliability have
been tested for measuring player kinematics on the ﬁeld, notably distance and speed
(Aughey 2011; Barbero-Alvarez et al. 2010; Jennings et al. 2010; Rampinini et al.
2015), accelerations being acceptable only with high-sampling-rate (>10 Hz) GPS
devices (Buchheit et al. 2014a). Recently, the concurrent validity (radar-based
method was the reference) of two distinct GPS units (5 and 20 Hz sampling rates)
to obtain the sprint mechanical properties using the simple method was investigated
(Nagahara et al. 2017). The results showed that GPS devices made possible to
obtain consistent FvP proﬁles, but the percentage bias showed a wide range of
overestimation or underestimation for both systems (−5.1 to 2.9% and −7.9 to 9.7%
for 5- and 20-Hz GPS), even if the 90% conﬁdence intervals of errors were smaller
for the 20-Hz GPS than those for 5-Hz GPS. Consequently, the validity of com-
puting mechanical outputs during sprint acceleration with GPS units (even at high
sample rate) came short of acceptable level, although the accuracy with the
higher-sampling-rate
system
was
markedly
higher
than
that
with
lower-sampling-rate system. When improved global or local positioning system
technology becomes available, this opens interesting possibilities for practical
measurements of sprint-acceleration mechanical features directly during training
exercises or competition games, without setting speciﬁc tests.
254
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 256 -->
11.6
Practical Applications
11.6.1
Testing Considerations
In addition to the accuracy of the devices used to measure velocity- or position-time
data, the accuracy and reliability of the present simple sprint method depends also
on the rigor with which the testing protocol is set and the data analyzed. Here, we
will detail the different practical points of a typical testing session using the simple
sprint method that contributes to decrease the measurement errors.
Warm-up. Since we aim to assess the individual maximal sprint capabilities,
athletes have to perform a sprint speciﬁc warm-up allowing him to reach his
maximal performances during the following test. For instance, warm-up should
comprise *5 to 10 min of low-pace running, followed by 3 min of lower limb
muscle stretching, 5 min of sprint-speciﬁc drills, and 3–5 progressive 30–40 m
sprints separated by 2 min of passive rest.
Number of trials and sprint distances. After warm-up, each athlete has to
perform at least two sprints with maximal effort. More trials (3–5) is better to be
sure to measure the athlete’s maximal capabilities, while rest between trials is
sufﬁcient to be sure that no fatigue occurs. Only the best performance (e.g. time at
30 m) will be then considered for analysis. Note that if the performance or
mechanical outputs are too different between trials, the relevance of the data is
altered. As mentioned before, the sprint distances should be different according to
the level of the athletes in order to cover all the acceleration phase: *30 m for
non-expert sprinters (e.g. soccer or rugby players) until to 50–60 m for track and
ﬁeld sprinters.
Starting position. As mentioned in the previous section, when using split times
(from photocells or high speed camera) as input measurement, the starting position
should be a three-point crouching position with the start of the timer when the
thumb leaves the ground and split times have to be corrected adding 0.1 s. When
velocity is measured (radar or laser guns), the starting position can be set according
to the speciﬁcity of the sport activity: starting-blocks, three-point crouching posi-
tion, stand-up or others. The choice has to be done in order to evaluate the athlete’s
force production capabilities in similar body conﬁguration as during competition.
Shoes and running surfaces. Since the type of the ground surface (tarmac, wet/
dry grass, tartan®, wood ﬂoor) and the properties of the shoe outsole (classical
running shoes, spikes, cleats) inﬂuence the friction between feet and ground during
sprint acceleration, the horizontal force production can be affected by both of them.
Obviously, sprint testing should be performed in surface and shoe conditions
similar as those used in competition. So, for routine and follow-up testing, it is
important that sprints are always performed on the same surface using the same
kind of shoes.
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
255


<!-- Page 257 -->
11.6.2
Data Interpretation
Beyond its accuracy and reliability, the interest of a simple ﬁeld method rests on the
good interpretation of the mechanical outputs, each of them presenting a very
speciﬁc meaning, and the transfer to practical information for training purposes.
Deﬁnition and practical interpretation of the main variables of interest when using
FvP proﬁling in sprint have been well presented and discussed in Morin and
Samozino (2016) and in previous section/chapter of the present book. Here, we will
brieﬂy sum-up the main indexes characterizing the athlete’s force production
capabilities, in a logical order to well understand, and then improve, sprint
mechanics (an example of such indexes for a typical athlete is presented in
Table 11.3). Note that these several variables can be obtained after having deter-
mined s and vHmax from experimental data (velocity, split times) using least square
regression method and Eq. 11.6 or 11.7, and computing at each instant (every 0.1 s
or lower) aH; FH; vH; x; PH and RF (see Sect. 11.2 for more details).
Index of sprint acceleration performance. The variable representing the ath-
lete’s sprint acceleration performance is the most important since it is what athletes
and coaches want to improve. This index should be chosen regarding the sport
activity and the position of the player on the ﬁeld for team sports. For instance, the
performance can be characterized by the time at 50 m for 100-m sprinters, the time
at 20 or 30 m for soccer players or rugby backs and the time at 10 or 15 m for a
soccer goal keeper or rugby forwards. In some cases, the distance cover during a
given time (for instance 2 or 4 s) also makes lots of sense. For the following
variables, the distance or duration to consider for the acceleration phase have also
to be determined according to the speciﬁcity of the performance to improve and the
distance over which sprint acceleration should be optimized (short or long sprint
accelerations).
Index of horizontal power and force produced during acceleration. Sprint
acceleration performance is directly related to the mean horizontal power output
developed over the acceleration phase (Morin et al. 2011a, 2012), and also in turn
to the mean horizontal force produced since running speed is the consequence of
the horizontal force production. So, mean horizontal power and mean horizontal
force (expressed or not relatively to body mass) over the targeted distance/time are
two macroscopic indexes of the athlete’s actual mechanical production during the
test, even if the associated information are very close of those brought by the
acceleration performance indexes.
Index of horizontal power and force production capabilities. The horizontal
power and force actually produced during the sprint acceleration phase depends on
the maximal horizontal force production capability. The latter can be dissociated in
two different and independent abilities. First, the ability to produce very high level
of horizontal force at low velocities is characterized by the theoretical maximal FH
athlete can produced (F0) and mainly refers to the initial pushes of the athlete onto
the ground during sprint acceleration. Second, the ability to keep developing
horizontal force at very high velocities is quantiﬁed by the theoretical maximal
velocity (v0) which represents the maximal velocity until which the athlete is able to
produced horizontal force. The weight of F0 and v0 in mean force production, and
so in sprint acceleration performance, depends on the acceleration distance to
256
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 258 -->
cover. The maximal power output ðPHmaxÞ is the combination of F0 and v0, and
reﬂects the overall mechanical output capabilities of the athlete.
Indexes of mechanical effectiveness of force application. The capability to
produce horizontal force during sprinting depends on lower limb capability to
produce force and on the ability to orient it effectively (i.e. horizontally) onto the
ground. The overall mechanical effectiveness of an athlete during sprinting accel-
eration is well quantiﬁed by the mean RF over the targeted distance/time. As for the
force production capabilities, the overall mechanical effectiveness can be dissoci-
ated in two different abilities. First, the ability to orient effectively the force pro-
duced at low velocities, i.e. in the ﬁrst steps of the acceleration phase, is well
characterized by the maximal RF value (RFmax). Second, the ability to maintain
high level of effectiveness despite the increase in velocity, well quantiﬁed by the
rate of decrease in RF with velocity (DRF). The analysis of these different
mechanical effectiveness indexes in parallel with the previous ones related to force
production capabilities allows coaches to distinguish what is associated to athlete’s
“physical” qualities (lower limb muscle force production capabilities) and “tech-
nical” abilities (mechanical effectiveness of force application), which can help them
to orient training on each athlete’s strengths and/or weaknesses in the aims to
improve performance or prevent from some muscular injuries. This will be
addressed in the two following sections.
11.6.3
Optimization of Sprint Acceleration Performance
When a training program is designed to improve sprint acceleration performance,
the simple sprint method and all the above-mentioned indexes can be used to
compare athletes to others or to the rest of the team (e.g. Cross et al. 2015), and to
follow each athlete within the season or between seasons. The training content can
be individualized to mainly focus on weaknesses, while trying to keep strengths at
similar level, and planned regarding the distance over which sprint acceleration
should be optimized.
Comparison between athletes. The interest of FvP proﬁling to optimize sprint
acceleration performance has been well illustrated through the case report presented
in Morin and Samozino (2016) with two rugby players of an elite union team
(Fig. 11.9). They have similar sprint acceleration performance over 20 m, but with
opposite force production capabilities. Player #1 presents higher horizontal force
production capabilities in the ﬁrst slow steps of the sprint (i.e. higher F0) but lower
ones at high velocities (i.e. v0) than Player #2. These differences in horizontal force
production are mainly due to differences in mechanical effectiveness: Player #1 has
a higher mechanical effectiveness at low running speeds than Player #2 (RFmax),
but he is less able to maintain this effectiveness when speed increases
(DRF = −7.7% s m-1, i.e. loss of 7.7% of effectiveness at each increase of 1 m s−1
in speed) compared to Player #2 for who the effectiveness is only altered by 5.8%
for the same speed increment. If the training program for these two players is
designed to improve sprint performance (e.g., here 20-m time), it should target
different capabilities. A similar program given to these players, based on the fact
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
257


<!-- Page 259 -->
that they have similar 20-m sprint times, will very likely result in suboptimal
adaptations for both of them. Player #2 should develop F0 through increasing
RFmax and/or his lower limb muscle power (to increase the amount of total force
produced). The latter can be assessed using FvP proﬁling in jumping described in
Fig. 11.9 Horizontal force-velocity proﬁles of 2 elite rugby union players obtained using the
simple sprint method from maximal 30-m sprints. Both players reached their maximal running
speed before the 30-m mark
258
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 260 -->
Chap. 4. Contrastingly, Player #1 has to increase v0, notably by improving his
mechanical effectiveness at high velocities in order to decrease DRF.
Effect of training. Training programs focusing on F0 or v0 are very different since
they refer to opposite training modalities associated to different movement veloci-
ties, force to produce, body positions or segment conﬁgurations. For instance,
resisted sled training represents a speciﬁc means of providing overload to
horizontal-force capacities which is practical and cost-effective training modality,
and which can be used very easily by soccer players of all levels (Petrakos et al.
2016). We recently showed that very-heavy sled training using much greater loads
than traditionally recommended (sled with a load of *80% of body mass, Cross
et al. 2017) clearly increased F0 and RFmax, with trivial effect on v0 (Morin et al.
2017). Contrastingly, training horizontal force production speciﬁcally at very high
velocities, as during over speed conditions, should improve DRF and v0 (work
currently in progress). Recently, a case report from Cameron Josse, an US strength
and conditioning coach, brought supports to the sensibility of v0 to speciﬁc training.
He used FvP proﬁle in sprinting (using MySprint App) with a National Football
League Linebacker during an 8 week training focusing on high velocity sprinting.
This training included long accelerations (from 20 to 50 m), most of them being
performed in an upright posture, technical drills aiming at emphasizing frontside
mechanics when running upright and some horizontal plyometrics (e.g. power skips
for maximal distance). This training induced a decrease in F0, RFmax and PHmax, but
an increase in v0, 10-m mean RF and DRF (Table 11.2). This leads to improvements
in the actual maximal running speed reached (*+6%) and time to cover 30 m
(*+3%), while no gain in 10- and 20-m split times (Table 11.2). This case report
well supports the positive effect of training exercises focusing on improving the
Table 11.3 Changes in sprint acceleration performance, horizontal power and force production
capabilities and mechanical effectiveness for a NFL linebacker following 8 weeks of speciﬁc
high-velocity sprint training
Pre-training
Post-training
%
change
Indexes of sprint acceleration
performance
10-m time (s)
1.93
1.96
1.6
20-m time (s)
3.22
3.21
−0.3
30-m time (s)
4.42
4.33
−2.0
Actual maximal
velocity (m s−1)
8.22
8.7
5.8
Indexes of horizontal power and
force production capabilities
F0 (N kg−1)
10.2
9.2
−9.8
v0 (m s−1)
8.39
8.91
6.2
PHmax (W kg−1)
21.5
20.5
−4.7
SFV (N s m−1 kg-1)
−1.22
−1.03
−15.1
Indexes of mechanical
effectiveness of force application
RFmean over 10 m
(%)
31.9
33.1
3.8
RFMAX (%)
59
57
−3.4
DRF (% s m−1)
−11.1
−9.4
−15.3
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
259


<!-- Page 261 -->
ability to keep producing horizontal force at high velocities (and so with an upright
position) on v0 and DRF, and in turn on long sprint acceleration performance.
Force-velocity proﬁle versus Split times. Since 5-m splits and 30–40-m ﬂying
splits are well correlated with F0 or v0, respectively (personal data), some strength
and conditioning coaches have used these split times or their ratio (5-m/30–40 m) to
have information about force and velocity capabilities of their athletes/players. This
could give an overall good view of the individual F-v proﬁle in sprinting, but limited
and approximate. Indeed, considering a performance (here sprint split times) as an
interchangeable information for the underlying neuromuscular properties or physi-
ological mechanisms (even if there are good correlations between them) can lead to
inaccuracies, which can be acceptable for recreational athletes but risked for high
level population. This is a bit like considering jump height is a good index of lower
limbs maximal power, which is not exactly the case as discussed in the previous
chapter on the optimal F-v proﬁle (Chap. 5). Personal simulations performed using
the published equations show that two players may have the same 5-m splits and
different F-v proﬁles characterized by different F0 (up to 10–15%). The F-v proﬁle is
interesting since it brings information about what causes the performance, and not
the performance per se (Buchheit et al. 2014b). The latter depends on other factors
than only the mechanical properties, as the body mass (same split times with two
different body mass does not correspond to the same F-v proﬁle) or the distance
targeted for the split times. Moreover, split times do not differentiate between force
production capability and the effectiveness of force application, which brings very
interesting additional information, as illustrated in the previous case report. Finally,
we have no idea towards which value should tend a short/long split ratio
(5-m/30–40 m), while the optimization of the F-v proﬁle in sprint is conceivable, as
it has been done in jumping with the optimal F-v proﬁle (current work in progress).
11.6.4
Hamstring Injury Prevention and Monitoring
of the Return to Sport
Given (i) the role of hip extensors, and notably hamstrings, in horizontal force
production during sprinting (see section about “the hip extensors hypothesis” in
previous chapter) and (ii) the high occurrence of hamstring muscle injuries during
high-speed and power actions such as sprinting, notably in soccer (Woods et al.
2004), it could have been expected that the alteration of hamstring muscle function
(as before or after an injury) could affect FvP proﬁle in sprinting. So, through
collaborations leaded by Jurdan Mendiguchia, we have recently studied FvP proﬁle
in sprint in the context of hamstring injuries.
260
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 262 -->
FvP proﬁle in sprint and return to sport after a hamstring injury. First, we
showed that soccer players returning from a recent hamstring injury and being
cleared to play, had substantial lower sprinting speed performance and reduced
mechanical horizontal properties, notably F0, compared with the uninjured players
(Mendiguchia et al. 2014). Approximately two months of regular soccer training
after return to sport, substantial improvements in sprinting speed (acceleration)
were observed concomitantly with an increase in F0 until similar levels as uninjured
players, whereas v0 remained unaltered (Fig. 11.10). Therefore, practitioners should
consider assessing and training horizontal force production during sprint running
after acute hamstring injuries in soccer players before return to sport. Second, the
sensibility of F0 to weakness or alteration of hamstring muscles were supported by
the changes in FvP properties of sprinting in two injury case studies related to
hamstring strain management (Mendiguchia et al. 2016). The Case #1 concerned a
professional rugby player during a repeated sprint task (10 sprints of 40 m) when an
injury occurred (5th sprint). The Case #2 refers to a professional soccer player prior
to (8 days) and after (33 days) an acute hamstring injury. The results showed that
F0 was altered both before and after return to sport from a hamstring injury in these
two elite athletes with little or no change in v0. They also underlined that the simple
on-ﬁeld sprinting method was sensitive enough to indicate speciﬁc changes in
horizontal mechanical properties pre- or pro-ceding an acute hamstring injury (the
delay between the change observed in mechanical outputs and the injury might be
as short as one or two sprints in the rugby player’s case). So, practitioners should
consider regularly monitoring horizontal force production during sprint running
both from a performance and injury prevention perspective.
FvP proﬁle in sprint and hamstring injury prevention. Given the previous
results about association between horizontal force capabilities and hamstring
muscles alterations, we hypothesized that lower and/or decrease in the horizontal
force propulsion could reveal a functional weakness of hamstring muscles which
could predispose them to an upcoming injury (Edouard et al. in submission
Fig. 11.10 Force- and power-velocity relationships (and associated F0, v0 and PHmax) of soccer
players at the moment of return to sport after an hamstring muscle injury and 2 months after return
to sport, and of uninjured soccer players. Lines represents averaged curves of the groups (standard
deviations are not shown for clarity reasons) (from Mendiguchia et al. 2014)
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
261


<!-- Page 263 -->
process). This was tested on a cohort of 93 collegiate Japanese soccer players over
an entire season with tests of sprint FvP proﬁle every three months. Results showed
that, in addition to the fact that previous hamstring injury was associated with
higher risk of new hamstring injury (as previously reported), a lower F0 was sta-
tistically related to a higher risk of sustaining a new hamstring injury. These
ﬁndings, based only on tests over one season and 8 hamstring injuries, have to be
conﬁrmed by further prospective cohort study, which is currently in progress.
11.6.5
Better Understanding of the Limit of Human
Sprinting Performance
Besides to be a practical method to be used for performance optimization and injury
prevention, the sprint simple method can also help to bring new insights into the
limits of human locomotion since it makes possible to estimate sprinting
mechanical properties of the fastest men and women on earth of all time, without
having testing them in the lab. In 2017, we compared the FvP proﬁles of women
and men during 100-m ﬁnals of international events (World championships and
Olympic Games) of the past 30 years based on split times provided by the IAAF
Biomechanics reports after most of these competitions1 (Slawinski et al. 2017). This
comparison allowed to better understand the origins of differences in sprint running
performances between men and women, notably during the acceleration phase. All
the sprinting FvP proﬁle variables were greater in men than in women. The *20%
higher PHmax values for men were explained by both *10% higher F0 (normalized
to body mass) and v0 values (Fig. 11.11). However, when standardized to
inter-individual variability, the difference in v0 between men and women is extre-
mely large (effect size of 5.5) while the difference in F0 is only moderate (effect
size = 0.88). Moreover, only v0 was correlated to 100-m performance, which means
that the higher 100-m sprinting performances in men compared to women are
mainly explained by a higher capability to keep producing horizontal force onto the
ground at very high velocity, and thus to keep accelerating.
When we focus on the acceleration phase of some historical 100-m World
records, we can have a roughly view of the evolution over time in the limit of
human sprinting mechanical properties. Based on split and reaction times provided
by the IAAF Biomechanics reports, sprinting FvP proﬁles has been estimated for
the world records of Carl Lewis in 1991 (9.86 s, Tokyo), Maurice Greene in 1999
(9.79 s, Athens) and Usain Bolt in 2009 (9.58 s, Berlin), each of them representing
a speciﬁc era in the sprint story. An approximate estimation of the FvP proﬁle of
Jesse Owens when he obtained the World record in 1936 (10.2 s, Chicago) has also
been done, but with less reliability than the previous ones. Figure 11.12 presented
their FvP proﬁles, and shows that the increase in 100-m performance is associated
1http://www.iaaf.org/.
262
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 264 -->
to an increase in power capabilities and an overall shift to the top and the left of the
F-v relationship. These changes were mainly due to changes in equipment (notably
from forties to nineties with for instance spikes and Tartan(R)), training methods and
loads or athlete’s professionalization. It is worth noting that Maurice Green and
Usain Bolt presented similar maximal power output during their World record, but
with a different Fv proﬁle: a Fv proﬁle more oriented towards velocity capabilities
for Bolt. Even if Bolt ran the 10 ﬁrst meters slower than Green (1.74 s vs. 1.73 s,
respectively, reaction time not included), he would have virtually been in front of
Green from *20 m (2.76 s vs. 2.73 s, respectively, reaction time not included) to
the ﬁnish line. This underlines the higher importance, in long sprint performance, of
Fig. 11.11 Mean ± SD of force- and power-velocity relationships of world class women (solid
lines) and men (dashed lines) athletes during 100-m ﬁnals of international events (World
championships and Olympic Games) of the past 30 years based on split times provided by the
International Association of Athletics Federations Biomechanics reports (from Slawinski et al.
2017)
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
263


<!-- Page 265 -->
the capability to keep producing horizontal force at high velocities than the capa-
bility to produce high level of horizontal force at low ones. This speciﬁc capability
seems to be the main limit of human high speed bipedal locomotion.
11.7
Conclusion
This chapter presents an accurate and reliable simple method to determine the
mechanical properties of the force production during sprinting. This method, based
on a macroscopic biomechanical model and validated in laboratory conditions in
comparison to force plate measurements, is very convenient for ﬁeld use since it
only requires anthropometric (body mass and stature) and spatio-temporal (split
times or instantaneous velocity) input variables. It provides different information on
the athlete’s horizontal force production capabilities: maximal power output,
maximal horizontal force, maximal velocity until which horizontal force can be
produced and mechanical effectiveness of force application onto the ground. These
information present interesting practical applications for sport practitioners to
individualize training focusing on sprint acceleration performance, but also in
hamstring injury prevention perspectives.
Fig. 11.12 Estimations of force- and power-velocity relationships of four historic 100-m World
record holders: Jesse Owens in 1936 (10.2 s, Chicago), Carl Lewis in 1991 (9.86 s, Tokyo),
Maurice Greene in 1999 (9.79 s, Athens), Usain Bolt in 2009 (9.58 s, Berlin). These sprinting
mechanical properties have been estimated from split times of the acceleration phase of their
respective World record run, which was provided by the International Association of Athletics
Federations Biomechanics reports
264
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 266 -->
References
Arsac LM, Locatelli E (2002) Modeling the energetics of 100-m running by using speed curves of
world champions. J Appl Physiol 92(5):1781–1788. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.
00754.2001
Aughey RJ (2011) Applications of GPS technologies to ﬁeld sports. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 6
(3):295–310
Barbero-Alvarez JC, Coutts A, Granda J, Barbero-Alvarez V, Castagna C (2010) The validity and
reliability of a global positioning satellite system device to assess speed and repeated sprint
ability (RSA) in athletes. J Sci Med Sport 13(2):232–235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2009.
02.005
Bezodis NE, Salo AI, Trewartha G (2012) Measurement error in estimates of sprint velocity from a
laser displacement measurement device. Int J Sports Med 33(6):439–444. https://doi.org/10.
1055/s-0031-1301313
Buchheit
M,
Al
Haddad
H,
Simpson
BM,
Palazzi
D,
Bourdon
PC,
Di
Salvo
V,
Mendez-Villanueva A (2014a) Monitoring accelerations with GPS in football: time to slow
down? Int J Sports Physiol Perform 9(3):442–445. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2013-0187
Buchheit M, Samozino P, Glynn JA, Michael BS, Al Haddad H, Mendez-Villanueva A, Morin JB
(2014b) Mechanical determinants of acceleration and maximal sprinting speed in highly trained
young soccer players. J Sports Sci 32(20):1906–1913. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2014.
965191
Cavagna GA, Komarek L, Mazzoleni S (1971) The mechanics of sprint running. J Physiol 217
(3):709–721
Chelly SM, Denis C (2001) Leg power and hopping stiffness: relationship with sprint running
performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 33(2):326–333
Cross MR, Brughelli M, Brown SR, Samozino P, Gill ND, Cronin JB, Morin JB (2015)
Mechanical properties of sprinting in elite rugby union and rugby league. Int J Sports Physiol
Perform 10(6):695–702. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2014-0151
Cross MR, Brughelli M, Samozino P, Brown SR, Morin JB (2017) Optimal loading for
maximising power during sled-resisted sprinting. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 1–25. https://doi.
org/10.1123/ijspp.2016-0362
di Prampero PE, Botter A, Osgnach C (2015) The energy cost of sprint running and the role of
metabolic power in setting top performances. Eur J Appl Physiol 115(3):451–469. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00421-014-3086-4
di Prampero PE, Fusi S, Sepulcri L, Morin JB, Belli A, Antonutto G (2005) Sprint running: a new
energetic approach. J Exp Biol 208:2809–2816
Edouard P, Nagahara R, Samozino P, Rossi J, Brughelli M, Mendiguchia J, Morin J (under
review) Is maximal horizontal force output during sprint acceleration associated with increased
risk of hamstring muscle injuries in soccer: a pilot prospective study?
Furusawa K, Hill AV, Parkinson JL (1927) The dynamics of “sprint” running. Proc R Soc B
102:29–42
Haugen T, Buchheit M (2016) Sprint running performance monitoring: methodological and
practical considerations. Sports Med 46(5):641–656. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-015-
0446-0
Helene O, Yamashita MT (2010) The force, power and energy of the 100 meter sprint. Am J Phys
78:307–309
Henry FM (1954) Time-velocity
equations
and oxygen requirements
of “all-out” and
“steady-pace” running. Res Q 25:164–177
Jaskolska A, Goossens P, Veenstra B, Jaskolski A, Skinner JS (1999) Treadmill measurement of
the force-velocity relationship and power output in subjects with different maximal running
velocities. Sports Med Train Rehab 8:347–358
Jaskolski A, Veenstra B, Goossens P, Jaskolska A, Skinner JS (1996) Optimal resistance for
maximal power during treadmill running. Sports Med Train Rehabil 7:17–30
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
265


<!-- Page 267 -->
Jennings D, Cormack S, Coutts AJ, Boyd LJ, Aughey RJ (2010) Variability of GPS units for
measuring distance in team sport movements. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 5(4):565–569
Kawamori N, Newton R, Nosaka K (2014) Effects of weighted sled towing on ground reaction
force during the acceleration phase of sprint running. J Sports Sci 32(12):1139–1145. https://
doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2014.886129
Lockie RG, Murphy AJ, Schultz AB, Jeffriess MD, Callaghan SJ (2013) Inﬂuence of sprint
acceleration stance kinetics on velocity and step kinematics in ﬁeld sport athletes. J Strength
Cond Res 27(9):2494–2503. https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e31827f5103
Mendiguchia J, Edouard P, Samozino P, Brughelli M, Cross M, Ross A, Gill N, Morin JB (2016)
Field monitoring of sprinting power-force-velocity proﬁle before, during and after hamstring
injury: two case reports. J Sports Sci 34(6):535–541. https://doi.org/10.1080/02640414.2015.
1122207
Mendiguchia
J,
Samozino
P,
Martinez-Ruiz
E,
Brughelli
M,
Schmikli
S,
Morin
JB,
Mendez-Villanueva A (2014) Progression of mechanical properties during on-ﬁeld sprint
running after returning to sports from a hamstring muscle injury in soccer players. Int J Sports
Med 35(8):690–695. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1363192
Morin JB, Bourdin M, Edouard P, Peyrot N, Samozino P, Lacour JR (2012) Mechanical
determinants of 100-m sprint running performance. Eur J Appl Physiol 112(11):3921–3930.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-012-2379-8
Morin JB, Edouard P, Samozino P (2011a) Technical ability of force application as a determinant
factor of sprint performance. Med Sci Sports Exerc 43(9):1680–1688
Morin JB, Jeannin T, Chevallier B, Belli A (2006) Spring-mass model characteristics during sprint
running: correlation with performance and fatigue-induced changes. Int J Sports Med 27
(2):158–165. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2005-837569
Morin JB, Petrakos G, Jimenez-Reyes P, Brown SR, Samozino P, Cross MR (2017) Very-heavy
sled training for improving horizontal-force output in soccer players. Int J Sports Physiol
Perform 12(6):840–844. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2016-0444
Morin JB, Samozino P (2016) Interpreting power-force-velocity proﬁles for individualized and
speciﬁc training. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 11(2):267–272
Morin JB, Samozino P, Bonnefoy R, Edouard P, Belli A (2010) Direct measurement of power
during one single sprint on treadmill. J Biomech 43(10):1970–1975
Morin JB, Samozino P, Edouard P, Tomazin K (2011b) Effect of fatigue on force production and
force application technique during repeated sprints. J Biomech 44(15):2719–2723. https://doi.
org/doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2011.07.020 (S0021-9290(11)00526-4 [pii])
Nagahara R, Botter A, Rejc E, Koido M, Shimizu T, Samozino P, Morin JB (2017) Concurrent
validity of GPS for deriving mechanical properties of sprint acceleration. Int J Sports Physiol
Perform 12(1):129–132. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2015-0566
Petrakos G, Morin JB, Egan B (2016) Resisted sled sprint training to improve sprint performance:
a systematic review. Sports Med 46(3):381–400. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-015-0422-8
Rabita G, Dorel S, Slawinski J, Saez de villarreal E, Couturier A, Samozino P, Morin JB (2015)
Sprint mechanics in world-class athletes: a new insight into the limits of human locomotion.
Scand J Med Sci Sports. https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.12389
Rampinini E, Alberti G, Fiorenza M, Riggio M, Sassi R, Borges TO, Coutts AJ (2015) Accuracy
of GPS devices for measuring high-intensity running in ﬁeld-based team sports. Int J Sports
Med 36(1):49–53. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1385866
Romero-Franco N, Jimenez-Reyes P, Castano-Zambudio A, Capelo-Ramirez F, Rodriguez-Juan
JJ, Gonzalez-Hernandez J, Toscano-Bendala FJ, Cuadrado-Penaﬁel V, Balsalobre-Fernandez C
(2016) Sprint performance and mechanical outputs computed with an iPhone app: comparison
with existing reference methods. Eur J Sport Sci:1–7. https://doi.org/10.1080/17461391.2016.
1249031
Samozino P, Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A (2008) A simple method for measuring force, velocity
and power output during squat jump. J Biomech 41(14):2940–2945
Samozino P, Morin JB, Hintzy F, Belli A (2010) Jumping ability: a theoretical integrative
approach. J Theor Biol 264(1):11–18
266
P. Samozino


<!-- Page 268 -->
Samozino P, Rabita G, Dorel S, Slawinski J, Peyrot N, Saez de Villarreal E, Morin JB (2016) A
simple method for measuring power, force, velocity properties, and mechanical effectiveness in
sprint running. Scand J Med Sci Sports 26(6):648–658. https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.12490
Samozino P, Rejc E, Di Prampero PE, Belli A, Morin JB (2012) Optimal force-velocity proﬁle in
ballistic movements. Altius: citius or fortius? Med Sci Sports Exerc 44(2):313–322
Simperingham KD, Cronin JB, Ross A (2016) Advances in sprint acceleration proﬁling for
ﬁeld-based team-sport athletes: utility, reliability, validity and limitations. Sports Med 46
(11):1619–1645. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-016-0508-y
Slawinski J, Bonnefoy A, Ontanon G, Leveque JM, Miller C, Riquet A, Cheze L, Dumas R (2010)
Segment-interaction in sprint start: analysis of 3D angular velocity and kinetic energy in elite
sprinters. J Biomech 43(8):1494–1502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.01.044
Slawinski J, Termoz N, Rabita G, Guilhem G, Dorel S, Morin JB, Samozino P (2017) How 100-m
event analyses improve our understanding of world-class men’s and women’s sprint
performance. Scand J Med Sci Sports 27(1):45–54. https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.12627
van Ingen Schenau GJ, Jacobs R, de Koning JJ (1991) Can cycle power predict sprint running
performance? Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol 63(3–4):255–260
Woods C, Hawkins RD, Maltby S, Hulse M, Thomas A, Hodson A, Football Association Medical
Research P (2004) The football association medical research programme: an audit of injuries in
professional football-analysis of hamstring injuries. Br J Sports Med 38(1):36–41
11
A Simple Method for Measuring Force, Velocity …
267

