# Chapter 13: Metabolic Power and Oxygen Consumption in Soccer


<!-- Page 298 -->
Chapter 13
Metabolic Power and Oxygen
Consumption in Soccer: Facts
and Theories
Cristian Osgnach and Pietro E. di Prampero
Abstract After a brief overview of the principles underlying the assessment of the
energy cost of accelerated/decelerated running on ﬂat terrain, as obtained from the
biomechanical equivalence between this last and uphill/downhill running at con-
stant speed, metabolic power and actual O2 consumption ( _VO2) will be estimated
during a typical training drill and during a brief period of a soccer match. This
exercise will show that: (i) _VO2, as estimated from metabolic power assuming
mono-exponential _VO2 on/off responses with a time constant of 20 s at the muscle
level, is essentially equal to that directly measured by means of a metabolic cart.
Hence, (ii) the fractions of the overall energy expenditure derived from aerobic and
anaerobic sources can also be estimated, provided that the individual _VO2max is
also known. Furthermore, the metabolic power approach will be updated to make it
possible to estimate energy cost and metabolic power also during walking episodes.
Indeed, whereas for any given incline the energy cost of running is independent of
the speed, the energy cost of walking reaches a minimum at an optimal speed above
and below which it increases. With increasing the incline of the terrain, the curve
relating energy cost to walking speed retains this general U shape, but is shifted to a
higher level, the optimum speed decreasing towards lower values. In addition, for
any given incline there exists a “transition speed” at which the energy cost of
walking becomes greater than that of running, and which corresponds to the speed
at which the subject spontaneously adopts the running gait. Hence the updated
algorithms detect this transition speed, as a function of the equivalent slope, and
utilise the appropriate energy cost of walking or running in the subsequent calcu-
lations. The concluding paragraphs are devoted to a critical discussion of the
principal assumptions underlying the metabolic power approach. Speciﬁcally, we
will stress that the approach as such can be meaningfully applied only to forward
walking or running. Thus, whereas other speciﬁc sport activities such as jumping,
C. Osgnach (&)  P. E. di Prampero
Department of Sport Sciences, Exelio srl, 33100 Udine, Italy
e-mail: cristian.osgnach@gmail.com
P. E. di Prampero
Department of Medical Sciences, University of Udine, 33100 Udine, Italy
© Springer International Publishing AG 2018
J.-B. Morin and P. Samozino (eds.), Biomechanics of Training and Testing,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-05633-3_13
299


<!-- Page 299 -->
moving backwards, laterally, or with the ball, may be taken into account, at least in
a broad sense, assuming appropriate correction factors (possibly on the bases of
actual experimental data), other activities, such as those occurring in rugby, of
American football, need entirely different approaches, a fact that, all too often, does
not seem to be appropriately considered.
13.1
Introduction
Soccer, as well as many other team sports, is characterised by frequent episodes of
accelerated and decelerated running. These bring about a substantial increase of the
overall energy cost of any given fraction of a soccer drill or match, as compared to a
similar period of running on ﬂat terrain at an equal average speed. Nevertheless, the
assessment of the work load in soccer has traditionally been based on speed and
distance (Carling et al. 2008; Sarmento et al. 2014) regardless of the time course of
the intervening speed changes, thus obviously neglecting the frequent occurrence of
sudden transitions between low and high exercise intensities and vice versa
(Osgnach et al. 2010). In recent years, however, thanks to the advances in GPS
technology, on the one side, and in our understanding of the energetics of accel-
erated and decelerated running, on the other, it has become possible: (i) to estimate
the time course of the instantaneous metabolic power requirement of any given
player and (ii) to infer therefrom the time course of the actual O2 consumption
( _VO2) (di Prampero et al. 2015).
The present chapter is devoted to review the basic assumptions underlying the
estimate of metabolic power, as well as its physiological meaning and its rela-
tionships with the actual _VO2, with the aim of arriving at a clear-cut picture of the
overall energy expenditure, and of its partition into aerobic and anaerobic fractions,
during any given time period of the match, or training session. In addition, we will
also update our previous approach, with the aim of taking into account separately
the running or walking episodes during any given time period of the match or
training session.
However, before proceeding further into these matters it seems useful to sum-
marise the main principles underlying the estimate of metabolic power, the reader
being referred to Chap. 12 for a more detailed discussion.
13.2
Theory
Direct measurements of metabolic power during accelerated/decelerated running is
rather problematic because of the short duration and high intensity of any such
events that, on the one side, preclude the attainment of the steady state and, on the
other, imply a metabolic power requirement that may greatly surpass the subjects’
_VO2max.
300
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 300 -->
An alternative approach is to estimate metabolic power from the product of the
energy cost of running (estimated) and the speed (measured) (see Sect. 13.3). In
turn, the energy cost of running can be estimated assuming that accelerated/
decelerated running on ﬂat terrain is biomechanically equivalent to uphill/downhill
running at constant speed.
The theory underlying the analogy mentioned above is summarised graphically
in Fig. 13.1, as from the original papers by our group (di Prampero et al. 2005;
Osgnach et al. 2010); it has been recently reviewed by di Prampero et al. (2015) and
is brieﬂy sketched below as well as in Chap. 12, the interested reader being referred
to the original papers. Figure 13.1 shows that accelerated running on ﬂat terrain and
running uphill at constant speed can be considered biomechanically equivalent,
provided that the angle (a) between the mean body axis and the terrain is equal in
both conditions. It necessarily follows that the slope of the terrain, as given by the
angle between the terrain and the horizontal, is proportional to the complement of a
(90 −a) that, as shown in Fig. 13.1, increases with the forward acceleration (af).
Furthermore, the incline of the terrain is generally expressed as the tangent of the
angle 90 −a; as such it can easily be obtained from the ratio between the forward
acceleration (af) and the acceleration of gravity (g) (Fig. 13.1):
af =g ¼ tan ð90 aÞ ¼ ES
ð13:1Þ
As calculated, ES is the tangent of the angle that makes accelerated running
biomechanically equivalent to running at constant speed up a corresponding slope,
hence the deﬁnition of “Equivalent Slope” (ES).
In addition to being equivalent to running uphill, accelerated running is char-
acterised by yet another difference, as compared to constant speed running. Indeed,
the average force that the runner must develop throughout a whole stride, in the
former case is given by the product of the runner’s body mass and the vectorial sum
of the forward acceleration and the acceleration of gravity
g0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
f þ g2


q


. As
such it is greater than that exerted when running uphill at constant speed, in which
case the force developed by the runner is given by the product of the body mass and
the acceleration of gravity (see Fig. 13.1). Thus, to take into account this effect, the
runner’s body mass must be multiplied by a factor here deﬁned “equivalent body
mass” (EM) as described by:
EM ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
f þ g2


q
= g ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
f = g2


þ 1
r
ð13:2Þ
Substituting Eq. (13.1) into Eq. (13.2):
EM ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
f = g2


þ 1
r
¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ES2 þ 1
p
ð13:3Þ
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
301


<!-- Page 301 -->
It must also be pointed out that during decelerated running, which is equivalent
to downhill running, and in which case the equivalent slope (ES) is negative, EM
will nevertheless assume a positive value because ES in Eq. (13.3) is raised to the
power of 2.
The Equivalent Slope (ES) and Mass (EM), as obtained from Eqs. (13.1) and
(13.3), do not take into account the effects of the air resistance. Indeed, to overcome
this last, during acceleration the runner must lean forward to a greater extent than
required by the forward acceleration per se. Conversely, during deceleration the air
resistance “helps” the runner’s braking action, so that he/she leans backwards to a
lesser extent that required by the (negative) forward acceleration. These effects,
albeit small, can be taken into account as follows. The air resistance (R) increases
with the square of the air velocity (v) as described by (di Prampero 2015):
R ¼ k  v2
ð13:4Þ
where k is a constant, the value of which, per kg body mass and when expressing v
in m s−1, ranges from 0.0025 to 0.0048 (J s2 kg−1 m−3) (Pugh 1970; Tam et al.
2012; di Prampero et al. 2015). Dimensionally, R is the mechanical work per unit
body mass and distance (J kg−1 m−1) performed against the air drag. Since the
numerator of this quantity is work (= mass  acceleration  distance), mass and
distance cancel out; hence, numerically and dimensionally R = acceleration
(m s−2). Therefore, to take into account the (small) effects of the air resistance, both
ES and EM can be calculated replacing af/g in Eqs. (13.1) and (13.3) with the
quantity af + R. If this is so:
Fig. 13.1 The subject is accelerating forward while running on ﬂat terrain (left panel) or running
uphill at constant speed (right panel). COM, subject’s centre of mass; af, forward acceleration; g,
acceleration of gravity; g0 ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
a2
f þ g2


q
, vectorial sum of af plus g; T, terrain; H, horizontal; a,
angle between the runner’s mean body axis throughout the stride and T; 90 −a, angle between T
and H. Simple geometry shows that the angle A – COM – B is equal to 90 −a. Hence, since the
length of the segment AB is equal to af, the tangent of the angle 90 −a is given by the ratio AB/
g = af/g. See text for details. (Modiﬁed after Osgnach et al. 2010)
302
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 302 -->
ES ¼
af þ R


=g
ð13:5Þ
and
EM ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ES2 þ 1
ð
Þ
p
ð13:6Þ
where the asterisk indicates that the appropriate quantities have been corrected for
the air resistance. Incidentally, Eq. (13.5) allows one to estimate that running at
20 km h−1 (5.55 m s−1) on ﬂat terrain in the absence of wind is equivalent to
running uphill on a treadmill at an incline of about 1% (ES*  (0.0037  5.552) /
9.81 = 0.0115). This is consistent with the common practice of having the subjects
run on the treadmill at a slope of 1% to simulate the air resistance encountered in
the aerobic speed range.
It can be concluded that, if the time course of the velocity during accelerated/
decelerated
running
is
determined,
and
the
corresponding
instantaneous
accelerations/decelerations calculated, Eqs. (13.5) and (13.6) allow one to obtain
the appropriate ES* and EM* values, thus converting accelerated/decelerated
running into the equivalent constant speed uphill/downhill running. Indeed, the
energy cost of this last (Cr), as a function of the incline (i) in the range between
i = −0.45 to i = + 0.45, is described by Minetti et al. (2002):
Cr ¼ 155:4  i5 30:4  i4 43:3  i3 þ 46:3  i2 þ 19:5  i þ 3:6
ð13:7Þ
Substituting i with the equivalent slope (ES*), denoting C0 the energy cost of
constant speed level running, and multiplying by the equivalent body mass (EM*),
the corresponding energy cost of accelerated/decelerated running can be easily
obtained:
Cr ¼ ð155:4  ES5 30:4  ES4 43:3  ES3 þ 46:3  ES2 þ 19:5  ES þ C0Þ
 EM
ð13:8Þ
For a more detailed discussion the reader is referred to Chap. 12.2, as well as to
the original papers.
13.3
Metabolic Power and Oxygen Consumption
In running, as well as in any other form of locomotion, the product of the instan-
taneous velocity (v, m s−1) and the corresponding energy cost per unit body mass
and distance (Cr, J kg−1 m−1) yields the instantaneous metabolic power (E

, W kg-1)
necessary to proceed at the speed in question:
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
303


<!-- Page 303 -->
E
 ¼ v  Cr
ð13:9Þ
As such, the metabolic power is a measure of the overall amount of energy
required, per unit of time, to reconstitute the ATP utilised for work performance.
We would like to point out also that Cr in Eq. (13.9) is the value applying at the
very moment at which v is determined. Therefore, whereas at constant speed, be it
on ﬂat terrain or up (down) a constant slope, both Cr and v (and hence E

) are
constant, this is not the case when either the slope of the terrain (and hence the
corresponding Cr), and/or the speed, vary. It should be noted that, in this latter case,
the speed changes have a twofold effect on metabolic power: on the one side
because of the direct role of v in setting E

, on the other because in the acceleration
(or deceleration) phase Cr is increased (or decreased) in direct proportion to the
acceleration (deceleration) itself.
It should also be noted that the preceding considerations, as well as Eq. (13.9) as
written, apply to running. In soccer, however, several walking periods are inter-
spersed among running episodes. Since the energy cost of walking (Cw) is sub-
stantially less than that of running, in order to estimate correctly the metabolic
power, these events must be clearly identiﬁed and the appropriate energy cost
values applied, as discussed in detail below (Sect. 13.4).
At variance with the metabolic power, the actual oxygen consumption ( _VO2) is a
measure of the amount of ATP actually resynthesized at the expense of the
oxidative processes. As such, at any given time, _VO2 may be equal, greater, or
smaller than the metabolic power because:
i. The oxidative processes are rather sluggish as compared to the rate of change of
the work intensity, in so far as they adapt to the required metabolic power
following an exponential process, the time constant of which at the muscle level
is on the order of 20 s;
ii. During strenuous exercise bouts of short duration, a common feature in soccer,
the metabolic power requirement can attain values greatly surpassing the
subject’s maximal O2 consumption ( _VO2max).
These considerations show that, whereas in a typical “square wave” aerobic
exercise, after about 3 min, actual _VO2 and metabolic power coincide, in soccer, as
well as in many other team sports, because of the occurrence of several high
intensity bouts of short duration, interspersed among low intensity periods, the time
course of _VO2 is markedly different than that of metabolic power requirement.
Hence, at any given time during a match, or a training drill, in the course of which
the intensity (metabolic power) changes rapidly (Fig. 13.2), the actual _VO2 can be
smaller, equal or greater that the instantaneous metabolic power, depending on:
(i) the time proﬁle of the metabolic power requirement and (ii) the subject’s
_VO2max.
As discussed in detail elsewhere (di Prampero et al. 2015), knowledge of the
time course of the metabolic power requirement allows one to estimate the
304
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 304 -->
corresponding time course of _VO2, assuming a mean time constant of the _VO2
kinetics during metabolic transients, as from literature data, on the basis of the
individual _VO2max. The so obtained estimated _VO2 values turned out to be
essentially equal to the actually measured ones in a group of 9 subjects who
performed a series of shuttle runs over 25 m distance in 5 s. Each bout was
immediately followed by an equal run in the opposite direction (again 25 m in 5 s).
A 20 s interval was interposed between any two bouts, and the whole cycle was
repeated 10 times (for a total running distance of 500 m). The running speed, the
corresponding instantaneous acceleration, energy cost and metabolic power were
then calculated by means of the same set of equations as implemented in a GPS
system (GPEXE ®, Exelio, Udine, Italy1) and described in detail elsewhere (di
Prampero et al. 2005, 2015; Osgnach et al. 2010). This allowed us to compare the
overall amount of O2 consumed, calculated from the integral of the _VO2 time
course estimated as described above, to the corresponding values obtained by
means of a portable metabolic cart (K4, Cosmed, Rome, Italy) yielding the actual
_VO2 consumption on a single breath basis.
The so obtained data are represented for a typical subject in Fig. 13.3 that reports
the time integral of:
Fig. 13.2 Metabolic power (E

, red line, sharp peaks) and O2 consumption ( _VO2, blue line,
smooth peaks) (W kg−1) as a function of time (s) during a series of shuttle runs (25 m + 25 m in
5 s + 5 s) followed by a 20 s interval, in one subject. Each cycle was repeated 10 times for a total
running distance of 500 m. Red areas (above _VO2 and below Ė) and blue areas (below _VO2)
indicate the anaerobic and aerobic energy yield during the exercise bouts, respectively. Green areas
(below _VO2 and above Ė) indicate the amount of O2 consumed in the recovery between bouts for
phosphocreatine resynthesis (alactic O2 debt payment). See text for details (Colour ﬁgure online)
1For information and further details on the system GPEXE ® (Udine, Italy) the reader is referred to
www.gpexe.com.
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
305


<!-- Page 305 -->
i. Metabolic power requirement (E

, red line, upper);
ii. _VO2 estimated on the basis of a time constant of 20 s at the muscle level (blue
line, middle);
iii. Actually measured _VO2 (green line, lower).
Inspection of this ﬁgure shows that:
i. Cumulated _VO2 values (estimated or measured) are very close;
ii. They follow fairly well the time course of the total energy expenditure (i.e. of
the time integral of the metabolic power requirement);
iii. The time constant of the _VO2 kinetics, as given by the horizontal time dif-
ference between the two functions (measured or estimated _VO2, and metabolic
power) turns out longer (35 s) at the measuring site (the upper airways) than
that assumed to hold at the muscle level (20 s).
These considerations lend experimental support to the approach brieﬂy described
above. Speciﬁcally, this approach allows one to assess: (i) the area below the _VO2
curve (see Fig. 13.2), thus yielding the overall amount of energy actually derived
from aerobic sources, as well as (ii) the area comprised between the curve reporting
the time course of the metabolic power and that reporting the time course of _VO2. It
must be pointed out that the physiological signiﬁcance of the area between these
two curves depends crucially on their relative position. Indeed, when the metabolic
power is greater than _VO2 the corresponding area is a measure of the amount of
Fig. 13.3 Time integral (J kg−1) as a function of time (s) of: (i) metabolic power requirement (red,
upper), as determined by GPS (GPEXE ®, Exelio, Udine, Italy); (ii) _VO2 estimated on the basis of
a time constant of 20 s (blue, middle); and (iii) _VO2 actually measured by means of a portable
metabolic cart (K4, Cosmed, Rome, Italy) (green, lower), during the same training drill and in the
same subject as in Fig. 13.2. See text for details. (Modiﬁed after di Prampero et al. 2015) (Colour
ﬁgure online)
306
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 306 -->
energy derived from anaerobic sources. When, on the contrary the metabolic power
is smaller than _VO2, the corresponding area indicates the amount of energy derived
from aerobic sources to “pay the alactic O2 debt”, i.e. to resynthesize a certain
amount of phosphocreatine (PCr) split in the preceding phase of the exercise. This
state of affairs allows one to draw a complete energy balance of any given period of
a match or of a training drill. Indeed, if the overall time integral (recovery periods
included) of the _VO2 curve is equal to that of the metabolic power curve, it can be
concluded that the energy sources utilised throughout the entire exercise cycle were
completely aerobic, in so far that the amount of PCr split during the high intensity
bouts was completely reconstituted in the recovery periods between bouts. On the
contrary, if the time integral of the metabolic power curve is greater than that of the
_VO2 curve, it can be concluded that a certain amount of energy was derived from
net lactate accumulation.
A practical example of the application of this approach to the ﬁrst minutes of an
actual soccer match is reported in Fig. 13.4. In this speciﬁc case, throughout the
selected time window, the metabolic power was substantially greater than the
player’s _VO2max and, in view of the relatively long duration of this high metabolic
power phases, the actual _VO2 did attain the player’s _VO2max. In addition in the
subsequent period characterised by a milder metabolic power (i.e. below _VO2max),
the actual _VO2 remained at the maximal level for several seconds. Because of this
state of affairs, the actual overall anaerobic energy yield, as given by the sum of all
red areas (above _VO2 and below Ė), was greater than the overall aerobic yield, as
given by the areas below the actual _VO2 during the high intensity exercise phases
plus the areas corresponding to the alactic O2 debt payment. The ﬁnal outcome of
this state of affairs is that a certain amount of Lactate must have been produced to
cover the difference between the overall energy requirement (area below the
metabolic power curve) and the overall aerobic energy yield (area underneath the
_VO2 curve).
It can be concluded that the approach brieﬂy described above, and graphically
illustrated in Fig. 13.4, allows one to draw a reasonably accurate overall energy
balance of any deﬁned time interval of a training period or of a match, provided that
the subject’s _VO2max is also known.
13.4
The Role of the Energy Cost in Setting Metabolic
Power Estimates
At variance with the data reported in Fig. 13.3, several recent studies reported
substantial underestimates of the metabolic power obtained from GPS data, as
compared to the actual O2 consumption, as determined by portable metabolic carts
(Buchheit et al. 2015; Brown et al. 2016; Highton et al. 2016; Stevens et al. 2015).
However, apart from some inconsistencies in the data collection and analysis brieﬂy
discussed elsewhere (Osgnach et al. 2016), close inspection of these studies shows
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
307


<!-- Page 307 -->
that all too often, the metabolic power approach was “stretched” to include activ-
ities such as training drills with the ball along winding paths, isometric efforts in
rugby, or any other situations that cannot be easily reconciled with the theoretical
pillars on which the metabolic power approach is based. In addition, in some of
these studies the effects of the terrain and of the inter-individual variability in the
energy cost of running are often neglected or only marginally discussed or are
limited to rather low acceleration/deceleration values. Indeed, Stevens et al. (2015)
recently reported that the average estimated energy cost of shuttle running turned
out to be about 15% smaller than the directly measured values (i.e. 4.95–5.73, as
compared to 5.73–6.71 J kg−1 m−1). This difference, albeit not marginal, may well
be due to individual difference of the shuttle running technique. In addition, this
study investigated a relatively small range of accelerations/decelerations (which can
be estimated to be <1 m s−2) and hence of the corresponding ES* values lying in a
range where the effects of the acceleration (upslope) are very nearly equal and
opposite to those of the deceleration (downslope).
In view of these discrepancies, the aim of the paragraphs that follow is to review
the basic assumptions underlying metabolic power estimates as obtained from GPS
data, as well as to point out the limits of this approach.
As discussed at length in the original papers, to which the reader is referred for
further details, the choice of the energy cost for constant speed running (C0) on ﬂat
terrain is pivotal in setting the energy cost of accelerated/decelerated running, and,
as such, the corresponding metabolic power. Its net value (above resting)
(J kg−1 m−1) ranges from 3.6 as determined on the treadmill by Minetti et al.
Fig. 13.4 Metabolic power (E

, red line, sharp peaks) and estimated O2 consumption ( _VO2, blue
line, smooth peaks) (W kg−1) as a function of time (s) during the ﬁrst minutes of an actual soccer
match in one player, whose _VO2max above resting (18 W kg−1  52 ml O2 kg−1 min−1) is
indicated by the broken horizontal line. See text for detail and Fig. 13.3 for the meaning of the
coloured areas (Colour ﬁgure online)
308
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 308 -->
(2002), to 4.32 ± 0.42 on the treadmill and to 4.18 ± 0.34 on the terrain, as
determined more recently by Minetti et al. (2012) at 11 km h−1, to 4.39 ± 0.43
(n = 65), as determined by Buglione and di Prampero (2013) during treadmill
running at 10 km h−1, the great majority of data clustering around a value of
4 J kg−1 m−1 (Lacour and Bourdin 2015). Thus, whereas on the one side it would
be advisable to determine C0 on each subject, on the other it is often convenient to
assume a unique value on the order of 4 J kg−1 m−1.
It should also be pointed out that, apart from the inter-individual variability of
C0, its value depends also on the type of terrain (e.g.: artiﬁcial vs. natural grass,
compact vs. soft surface, etc.), so that once again, its numerical value must be
selected with a pinch of salt. Furthermore, it should also be stressed that the
obtained estimates of energy cost and metabolic power apply to forwards running,
so that the metabolic cost of other speciﬁc situations arising during a match or a
training drill in soccer or in other sports, such as backwards running, running with
or without the ball, sudden jumps, changes of direction, tackles, etc., inevitably
introduces a certain degree of uncertainty and must be treated accordingly.
However, at the present stage, among the clear-cut scientiﬁc data available in the
literature, none allow one to take into account with reasonable accuracy this state of
affairs. As such, rather than relying on dubious corrections and assumptions, we
deem it advisable to live with this uncertainty, inevitably built in the system’s
algorithms. This is particularly relevant in team sports such as rugby or American
football in which the energetics of the numerous episodes in which the players
collide violently or push forcefully against each other is not easily amenable to that
of forwards running.
It should ﬁnally be pointed out that these general considerations apply also to the
approaches based on speed and/or acceleration which cannot (and do not) yield any
information on the sport speciﬁc activities mentioned above (Polgalze et al. 2015).
Furthermore, even when applied to forward running these approaches overlook the
inter-individual variability of the energy cost of running as well as the effects of the
type of the terrain there-upon.
Another point to be considered when dealing with the energy cost and metabolic
power of running is the fact that the equivalence between accelerated/decelerated
and uphill/downhill running is based on the data obtained by Minetti et al. (2002) in
a range of inclines between −0.45 and +0.45. For inclines outside this range, our
approach relies on linear extrapolations of Minetti et al.’s data (see Giovanelli et al.,
2016), rather than on the authors’ polynomial equation which, obviously enough,
cannot be extended beyond the experimental range of observations [see Eq. (13.7)].
However, the occurrence of such high values of acceleration/deceleration is rather
infrequent so that this approximation cannot be expected to lead to any substantial
errors.
These considerations apply to running; however, during a typical soccer match
several walking episodes are interspersed among running bouts, a fact that may
have indeed contributed to some of the above mentioned discrepancies between
estimated metabolic power and measured O2 consumption. Indeed, whereas for any
given incline the energy cost of running at constant speed is independent of the
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
309


<!-- Page 309 -->
speed itself, the energy cost of walking reaches a minimum at an optimal speed
above and below which it increases. As reported in Fig. 13.5:
i. For level walking Cw attains a minimum of about 2 J kg−1 m−1 (i.e. about half
the value of constant speed level running) at about 4.5 km h−1 (1.25 m s−1);
ii. At higher speeds Cw increases to reach a value about equal to that of level
running (4 J kg−1 m−1) at a speed on the order of 8 km h−1 (2.22 m s−1);
iii. With increasing the incline of the terrain, the curve Cw vs. speed retains a
general U shape, but is shifted to a higher level, the optimum speed decreasing
towards lower values;
iv. When walking downhill, until a slope of about –20%, the trend is reversed: at
any given speed Cw is lower, whereas the optimum speed increases;
v. For slopes steeper than −20%, the Cw vs. speed curved is shifted again
upwards and tends to become ﬂatter so that the optimum speed is difﬁcult to
identify precisely.
As reported by Minetti et al. (2002), the relationship between the minimum
energy cost of walking (Cwmin, J kg−1 m−1) and the incline of the terrain (i) can be
appropriately described by the following 5th order polynomial equation:
Cwmin ¼ 280:5  i5 58:7  i4 76:8  i3 þ 51:9  i2 þ 19:6  i þ 2:5
ð13:10Þ
where the last term (2.5 J kg−1 m−1) is the energy cost of walking at the optimal
speed on ﬂat terrain. It should also be pointed out that for very steep slopes (>
± 0.50), this equation yields Cwmin values rather close to those obtained from the
5th order polynomial equation describing the relationship between the energy cost
of running and the incline [Eq. (13.7)]. According to the authors, this suggests that
at these very high slopes walking and running “lose the pendulum like and
bouncing ball mechanisms”, so that at this steep slopes it may not be legitimate to
speak of “walking” or “running” as different gaits. Be this as it may, it seems
interesting to point out that, whereas the energy cost of running is independent of
the speed, in walking (at least in the range of slopes between 0 and ± 0.40, where it
is legitimate to speak of walking vs. running), as mentioned above, this is not the
case. Indeed, within this range of slopes there exists a speed, here deﬁned “tran-
sition speed”, at which the subjects spontaneously change their gait from walking to
running (dots in Fig. 13.5). On ﬂat terrain, the transition speed is on the order of
8 km h−1 (2.22 m s−1), essentially equal to that at which walking become more
expensive than running, in terms of energy cost. Incidentally, this state of affairs is
even more elaborate in dogs and horses, who, thanks to their quadrupedal loco-
motion, can adopt three types of gait: pace, trot and gallop. The spontaneously
adopted gait corresponding always to the more economical one (in terms of energy
cost). It can be reasonably assumed that also when walking or running uphill or
downhill, the transition speed corresponds to that at which the energy cost of the
two forms of locomotion become equal. The data reported in Fig. 13.5 allowed us
to estimate the transition speed (vtr, m s−1) for any given incline (or ES*) between
−0.30 and +0.40, as described by:
310
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 310 -->
vtr ¼ 107:1  ES5 þ 113:1  ES4 1:1  ES3 15:8  ES2 1:7  ES þ 2:3
ð13:11Þ
It should be noted that this equation applies only within the range of inclines or
ES* values indicated above. Indeed, for slopes steeper than +0.40, the minimum
energy cost of walking is equal to that of running whereas, for slopes steeper that
Fig. 13.5 Energy cost of walking (J kg−1 m−1) as a function of the speed (m s−1) at the indicated
incline (i). The open dots indicate the “transition” speed, i.e. the speed at which the energy cost of
walking and running are equal (see text). (Modiﬁed after Margaria 1938)
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
311


<!-- Page 311 -->
−0.30, it becomes difﬁcult to identify a clear-cut transition speed (see Fig. 13.5).
Thus, for any given ES* within the range from −0.30 to +0.40 the energy cost
utilised in the metabolic power calculations was that pertaining to walking or
running depending on whether the speed was below or above the transition
threshold described by the above equation. For steeper slopes the selected energy
cost was, in any case, that pertaining to running. It should also be pointed out that
this set of calculations is based on the implicit assumption that the analogy between
accelerated/decelerated running on ﬂat terrain, on the one side, and constant speed
uphill/downhill running, on the other, can be applied to walking, and hence that the
procedures to estimate the equivalent slope and mass are the same in the two forms
of locomotion.
13.5
The Limits of Metabolic Power Assessment
The model summarized above is based on several additional assumptions brieﬂy
reported below, the interested reader being referred to the original papers for further
details (di Prampero et al. 2005, 2015; Osgnach et al. 2010):
i. The overall mass of the runner is condensed in his/her centre of mass. This
necessarily implies that the energy expenditure due to internal work perfor-
mance (such as that required for moving the upper and lower limbs in respect
to the centre of mass) is the same during accelerated running and during uphill
running at constant speed up the same equivalent slope (ES*);
ii. Assumption (i) implies also that the stride frequency of accelerated running,
for any given ES* value, is equal to that of constant speed (uphill/downhill
running) over the corresponding incline;
iii. For any given ES*, the efﬁciency of metabolic to mechanical energy trans-
formation during accelerated running is equal to that of constant speed running
over the corresponding incline. This also implies that the biomechanics of
running, in terms of joint angles and torques, etc. is the same in the two
conditions;
iv. The calculate ES* values are assumed to be in excess of those observed during
constant speed running on ﬂat terrain in which case the runner is lining slightly
forwards. This, however, cannot be expected to introduce large errors, since in
all cases the reference value is the energy cost of constant speed running on
ﬂat terrain (C0).
312
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero


<!-- Page 312 -->
13.6
Conclusions
We would like to stress the fact that the technology for data collection must be
appropriately selected. Indeed, since we deal with accelerations, any sampling
frequency below 10 Hz is highly questionable. In addition, also the ﬁltering of the
signal to smooth the accelerations/decelerations of the centre of mass synchronous
with the stride frequency must be appropriately considered in order to reduce the
noise, without losing information. Finally, the often proposed utilisation of
mechanical quantities obtained by inertial sensors is dubious, because of the
absence, so far, of any convincing experimental data linking the observed
mechanical variables with the corresponding energy expenditure.
In concluding, we strongly support the general validity of the proposed model,
albeit within the limits discussed above, and provided that the actual investigated
sport activities consist mainly of (or are reasonably amenable to) forward running or
walking.
Acknowledgements Financial support of the “Lions Club Udine Duomo” is gratefully
acknowledged.
References
Brown DM, Dwyer DB, Robertson SJ, Gastin PB (2016) Metabolic power method underestimates
energy expenditure in ﬁeld sport movements using a GPS tracking system. Int J Sports Physiol
Perform 11:1067–1073
Buchheit M, Manouvrier C, Cassirame J, Morin JB (2015) Monitoring locomotor load in soccer: is
metabolic power, powerful? Int J Sports Med 36:1149–1155
Buglione A, di Prampero PE (2013) The energy cost of shuttle running. Eur J Appl Physiol
113:1535–1543
Carling C, Bloomﬁeld J, Nelsen L, Reilly T (2008) The role of motion analysis in elite soccer:
contemporary performance measurements techniques and work rate data. Sports Med 38:839–
862
di Prampero PE (2015) La Locomozione umana su Terra, in Acqua, in Aria. Fatti e Teorie.
Edi-Ermes, Milano, Italy, 221 + IX. pp 108–112
di Prampero PE, Fusi S, Sepulcri L, Morin JB, Belli A, Antonutto G (2005) Sprint running: a new
energetic approach. J Exp Biol 208:2809–2816
di Prampero PE, Botter A, Osgnach C (2015) The energy cost of sprint running and the role of
metabolic power in setting top performances. Eur J Appl Physiol 115:451–469
Giovanelli N, Ryan Ortiz AL, Henninger K, Kram R (2016) Energetics of vertical kilometer foot
races; is steeper cheaper? J Appl Physiol 120:370–375
Highton J, Mullen T, Norris J, Oxendale C, Twist C (2016) Energy expenditure derived from
micro-technology is not suitable for assessing internal load in collision-based activities. Int J
Sports Physiol Perform 20:957–961
Lacour JR, Bourdin M (2015) Factors affecting the energy cost of level running at submaximal
speed. Eur J Appl Physiol 115:651–673
Margaria R (1938) Sulla ﬁsiologia e specialmente sul consumo energetico della marcia e della
corsa a varia velocità ed inclinazione del terreno. Atti Acc Naz Lincei. 6:299–368
13
Metabolic Power and VO2 in Soccer: Facts and Theories
313


<!-- Page 313 -->
Minetti AE, Moia C, Roi GS, Susta D, Ferretti G (2002) Energy cost of walking and running at
extreme uphill and downhill slopes. J Appl Physiol 93:1039–1046
Minetti AE, Gaudino P, Seminati E, Cazzola D (2012) The cost of transport of human running is
not affected, as in walking, by wide acceleration/deceleration cycles. J Appl Physiol 114:498–
503
Osgnach C, Poser S, Bernardini R, Rinaldo R, di Prampero PE (2010) Energy cost and metabolic
power in elite soccer: a new match analysis approach. Med Sci Sports Exerc 42:170–178
Osgnach C, Paolini E, Roberti V, Vettor M, di Prampero PE (2016) Metabolic power and oxygen
consumption in team sports: a brief response to Buchheit et al.. Int J Sports Med. 37:77–81
Polglaze T, Dawson B, Peeling P (2015) Gold standard or fool’s gold? The efﬁcacy of
displacement variables as indicators of energy expenditure in team sports. Sports Med 46:657–
670
Pugh LG (1970) Oxygen intake in track and treadmill running with observations on the effect of air
resistance. J Physiol 207:823–835
Sarmento H, Marcelino R, Anguera MT, Campaniço J, Matos N, Leitão JC (2014) Match analysis
in football: a systematic review. J Sports Sci 32:1831–1843
Stevens TG, De Ruiter CJ, Van Maurik D, Van Lierop CJ, Savelsbergh GJ, Beek PJ (2015)
Measured and estimated energy cost of constant and shuttle running in soccer players. Med Sci
Sports Exerc 47:1219–1224
Tam E, Rossi H, Moia C, Berardelli C, Rosa G, Capelli C, Ferretti G (2012) Energetics of running
in top-level marathon runners from Kenya. Eur J Appl Physiol 112:3797–3806
314
C. Osgnach and P. E. di Prampero

